         Next Steps in SOA: Applications on the Network
Business Value Point of View:



S
      ervice-oriented architecture (SOA) distributes and decouples the processing of software from
      the data center to the edge of the network, and anywhere in-between.

As network traffic moves from data packets to XML-based content routing and Web services re-
quest messaging, the lines between the network and software architecture are blurring. In some
cases, SOA middleware is now delivered inside an XML-aware appliance. In other cases, the net-
work infrastructure is taking on new roles. And a new generation of SOA-aware software is vying
for attention.

All this has implications for network architects, software infrastructure architects, developers, and
enterprise platform vendors. For an IT organization, bringing network-based applications to reality
will require a new balance between architectural readiness and business value realization.

This report will benchmark the state of the practice of application processing on the network. Key
findings will provide insights into:

        • The types of applications most suited for network processing,
        • The network and IT benefits early adopters are realizing,
        • The role of the application architect vs. that of the network architect,
        • What enterprises are looking for in a SOA infrastructure, and
        • SOA security in web services and XML processing.

This is the third in an ongoing series of Aberdeen reports on SOA. This study will have important
implications for all participants in the SOA and network landscape, including users, developers,
integrators, and IT vendors.

Research approach: The research methodology consists of a broad-based survey of IT organizations
as well as one-on-one interviews with survey respondents.

Our research network reach: This study will be marketed to Aberdeen’s online community of
Global 5000 executives and decision-makers in addition to Aberdeen’s affiliate research channel
partners, with a total reach in excess of one million value chain executives.
End-user audience: The research findings will be of interest to CIOs and their direct reports, execu-
tives to whom the CIO reports, and business managers whose units directly depend on, or are influ-
enced by, IT implementations. This includes business process owners.
Time frame: 1Q06
Lead analyst: Peter S. Kastner, Senior Analyst, Enterprise Integration Technology Research

© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc.                                                           Telephone: 617 723 7890
260 Franklin Street                                                                        Fax: 617 723 7897
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112                                                          www.aberdeen.com
