Peter S. Kastner -- Litigation Biography

I. Biography of Peter S. Kastner

Area of Focus
Mr. Kastner concentrates on the use of technology in commercial applications, and how computer-related technology can be used to improve an enterprise's internal operations. Using his 30 years of commercial Information Technology experience and the full gamut of Aberdeen Group research, he advises IT executives on today's most practical technologies with emphasis on technology risk management, life-cycle benefits, micro-reengineering, and technology transitions.

Experience
Mr. Kastner has over 30 years of IT industry experience in both user and supplier organizations. As executive vice president at Aberdeen, he is responsible for the firm's fifty-person research organization and serves as Chief Information Officer. Prior to joining Aberdeen as vice president in 1988, he was a marketing executive with Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), Prime Computer, and Stratus Computer. He became one of the pioneers in industry-standard commercial performance benchmarks.

Over an eight-year period as a consultant and program manager with Arthur D. Little Inc., Mr. Kastner was actively involved in the management and execution of dozens of complex technology development projects spanning manufacturing, banking/financial services, health care, and government markets. Including: Chase Manhattan Bank trust accounting system, Ocean Spray Cranberries distributed client-server demand-fulfillment, hospital information system in Rio de Janeiro, OEM relations with three computer hardware vendors.

Mr. Kastner was for three years a programmer/analyst at a subsidiary of Wang Laboratories.

Mr. Kastner is the author or co-author of three book-length computer technology market research studies, has written numerous market research white papers, is widely quoted in the computer industry trade press, has appeared as a technology expert on television, and has been a guest lecturer at MIT and the Federal University at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Mr. Kastner attended Cornell University.

II. Aberdeen Group Litigation Experience

Peter S. Kastner

Computer Consoles vs. GTE Government Systems
Support for Blanc, Gilburne of Los Angeles (plaintiff counsel for CCI). Mr. Kastner reviewed technical/engineering documentation for CCI's planned RISC-Unix computer, prepared competitive analyses, developed technical performance theory. Proposed as expert witness in commercial computer performance. Case settled with substantial damages in favor of plaintiff.

GTE Products Corporation v. American Software, Inc.
Support for Fulbright & Jaworski (defense counsel). Software development breach of contract case. Aberdeen assessed technical and project management aspects. Expertise: IBM AS/400 and 3090 mainframe, SNA networking, project management, downsized computing (GTE's Spectrum project). Aberdeen identified potential expert witnesses.

Unisys vs. Florida Health and Rehabilitative Services (HRS)
Support for Carlton, Fields (counsel to Unisys). Unisys protested EDS/IBM bid. Kastner served as plaintiff expert witness re: design and performance of distributed IBM mainframe computer systems. Plaintiff not sustained; Florida subsequently cancelled $110M EDS contract for non-performance -- precisely the technical areas Kastner had predicted were inadequate.

Crossroads Software, Inc. vs. Open Systems Advisors
Support for Fish & Richardson (defense counsel for Crossroads Software). Plaintiff alleged trademark infringement on 'crossroads' name; demanded preliminary injunction. Kastner examined documents; judge cited his affidavit in denying preliminary injunction. Case settled out of court.

Intelligent Electronics, Inc. vs. Andersen Consulting LLP (Court of Common Pleas Chester County, Pennsylvania No. 96-04673)
Kastner retained by Montgomery, McCracken, Walker & Rhoads (defendant's fact expert witness for Andersen Consulting). IE accused Andersen of failing to successfully manage/implement a complex $17M order management, inventory/warehouse control, and financial accounting system project (multiple technology rollouts over three years). Kastner produced 129-page expert witness report and was deposed. Case settled the day before trial. Key issues: project management control, HP 3000 fitness for purpose, technology maturity in mid-1990s, IT professional services industry practices, runaway software projects.
