 
 
Information Technology 
May 25, 2006 
Announcement 
 Click here to visit the Information Technology channel. 
 
The Business Value in IT Outsourcing  
Hypothesis 
 
IT outsourcing has been around long enough for enterprises to taste the fruit and judge for 
themselves. Key drivers to IT outsourcing include high internal costs, staff skills quality and 
instability, infrastructure under-utilization, and challenges in technology adoption or regulatory 
compliance.  Yet many enterprises have not yet done a serious make-or-buy decision. Why not?  
On the other hand, many who have signed IT outsourcing contracts have serious buyer’s remorse. 
They complain about misjudging their ability and competency to manage the outsourcer, poor 
choices in metrics and SLAs, confusing low cost with value delivered, inflexible or outdated 
contract language, and other C-level headaches. Are these unhappy outsourcing customers on the 
way to court or are there ways to get the relationship on track?  
To both those who outsource and those who do not, Aberdeen will be asking how enterprises are 
maximizing total business value from an outsourcing decision, to be published as a benchmark 
report in late June 2006.  
 
Why Are Many Companies Ignoring Outsourcing? 
 
Since we began quantitative tracking of IT planning issues in 2004, Aberdeen has observed five 
major reasons why enterprises choose to outsource some or all of their IT: 
• 
Focusing on core competencies is the decision that IT excellence is best achieved by an 
outsider, allowing management more time for non-IT business decision-making; 
• 
Saving money is what most expect to achieve, although palming off a dysfunctional IT 
organization’s problems on a naïve outsourcer is a pipe dream; 
• 
IT resource constraints are a common complaint, and include lack of talent, costly talent, 
staff turnover, and having the wrong IT skill-sets in a rapidly changing company;  
• 
Time-to-market is a concern in highly competitive industries where IT agility is critical — 
outsourcer size, skills, and agility are often cited; and 
• 
Culture wars happen when line-of-business management gets fed up with IT intransigence 
and demands change, including the nuclear “blow it up” outsourcing option as a way to start 
anew. 
The range of outsourcing options available to companies of all sizes is extensive, and includes 
simple application outsourcing (e.g., e-mail) all the way to full-blown business process 
offshoring of major processes (e.g., general ledger or accounts payable). In spite of these options, 
many enterprises tell us they have never done a serious make-or-buy outsourcing decision on any 
segment of their IT requirements. 

Getting and Keeping IT Outsourcing Projects on Track to Business Value 
Page 2 
 
 
© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
Research Brief 
The first research question Aberdeen is determined to answer is what is inhibiting enterprises 
from taking a serious look at how operational transformation through IT outsourcing might 
benefit the organization? 
Getting to IT Outsourcing Success: Is Failure a Prerequisite?  
 
IT outsourcing takes skills that many companies apparently do not have. This should not be 
altogether surprising given the complexity of IT infrastructure, the nebulous IT performance 
metrics in place at many enterprises, the lack of a clear vision as to exactly what “good IT 
practices and results” ought to be, and the nature of the outsource contract process.  
We cannot name a single company that has outsourced IT functions and not learned some 
lessons — often very painful lessons not to be repeated under any circumstances. Our study will 
probe those lessons learned with a maturity model aimed at learning from the failures and 
mistakes of outsourcing practitioners. 
Outsourcing with Baseline Mis-Alignment 
The first class of IT outsourcing customers we intend to measure are those who are clearly 
misaligned. This can occur when the scope is poorly understood, when inaccurate internal 
metrics are used to drive pricing and SLA terms, and when the business changes over time away 
from the outsourcing contract terms. These companies are significantly out of alignment with 
what they intended and contracted to do. We suspect this population represents up to 30% of IT 
outsourcing engagements. Moreover, these customers may not realize that they are seriously 
misaligned. 
Figure 1 depicts IT maturity as measured by the frequency of measuring ROI after a software 
application upgrade or change. Over half of the companies rated best-in-class using Aberdeen’s 
IT maturity model measure ROI after every change, contrasted with over a third of the average 
and over half the laggard IT organizations. Our hypothesis is that a similar maturity spectrum 
effects outsourcing outcomes. 
Figure 1: IT Maturity — Application Upgrade/Change ROI Measurement 
6%
38%
56%
50%
25%
25%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Best in class
(20% of respondents)
Average
(50% of respondents)
Laggard 
(30% of respondents)
After each upgrade
Never
 
Source: AberdeenGroup, Achieving More Value from Enterprise Integration, May 2006 
Mainstream Outsourcing that is Sub-Optimal 
Our hypothesis is that half to two-thirds of IT outsourcing contracts are running at sub-optimal 
levels as measured by the perception of the outsourcing customer and its internal performance 
metrics. We will probe satisfaction levels and gather data on challenges to successful 
outsourcing: 

Getting and Keeping IT Outsourcing Projects on Track to Business Value 
Page 3 
 
 
© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
Research Brief 
• 
Service Level Agreements: Success in setting, maintaining, measuring, and aligning SLAs 
with the business units 
• 
Governance: Process, executive responsible, capacity, management process, and ability to 
execute before and after contract signing 
• 
Preparation: Human resources, project management, process and infrastructure fixes and 
freezes, and outsourcer support levels during the prep stage 
• 
Transition: The process and success in transitioning the staff, infrastructure, business 
process, and business users to the new, outsourced mode 
• 
Operations: Operational management issues and challenges running routinely 
• 
Change Management: How planned and unplanned changes map to the model anticipated 
in the outsourcing contract 
• 
Pricing: How planned and unplanned pricing in the contract maps to actual results and the 
reasons for the discrepancies 
• 
Conflict Resolution: How pervasive, deep, and ongoing are conflicts with the outsourcer? 
What contractual conflict resolution steps worked and where did the parties step outside the 
contract? Is remediation a viable alternative to litigation? 
• 
Metrics: How did companies perform before and after outsourcing, and how does that map 
to their IT and management maturity?  
Finding the Optimal Outsourcing Partnership 
Our hypothesis is that 5-10% of multi-million dollar IT outsourcing agreements are driving all of 
the anticipated business value to the buyer’s business. Our planned research will identify such 
companies and use a combination of survey and interview techniques to extract the metrics and 
techniques used by these enterprises to drive business value success in a true partnership with the 
outsourcer. We will answer the question, “how are companies successfully outsourcing and 
capturing the business value planned for the outsourcing contract?” 
Summary  
 
Aberdeen is embarking on a benchmark of IT outsourcing because prior research indicates a high 
level of dissatisfaction with outsourcing in general. We are also continually deepening our 
knowledge of the IT organizational maturity, with over 2,000 companies surveyed on IT in the 
past two years. From these data, we know that there is a wide spectrum of IT maturity levels 
across numerous metrics.  
The Aberdeen report, The Business Value in IT Outsourcing, will benchmark all size companies 
in the Global 5000 across all industries. The report will summarize the findings on why IT 
outsourcing projects become sub-optimal, how companies are aligning their outsourcing 
contracts and operations to maximize measurable business value, with recommendations for how 
outsourcing companies can improve their performance and outsourcing maturity.  In short, how 
companies can get and keep on track to business value. 
Companies interested in participating anonymously in the study research, or in receiving an 
executive summary of the report when issues in late June 2006, should contact the author, Peter 
Kastner, VP and Research Director, Enterprise Integration.

Getting and Keeping IT Outsourcing Projects on Track to Business Value 
Page 4 
 
 
 
Founded in 1988, AberdeenGroup is the technology- driven research destination of choice for the global business executive. 
AberdeenGroup has over 100,000 research members in over 36 countries around the world that both participate in and direct the most 
comprehensive technology-driven value chain research in the market. Through its continued fact-based research, benchmarking, and 
actionable analysis, AberdeenGroup offers global business and technology executives a unique mix of actionable research, KPIs, tools, 
and services. 
This document is the result of research performed by AberdeenGroup. AberdeenGroup believes its findings are objective and represent 
the best analysis available at the time of publication.  Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this publication are copyrighted by 
AberdeenGroup, Inc. and may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior 
written consent by Aberdeen Group, Inc.  
Research Brief 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Related Research 
The SOA in IT Benchmark Report, 
December 2005 
Achieving More Value from Enterprise 
Integration Benchmark Report, 
 May 2006 
 
Why Aberdeen Group is Focusing on Enterprise 
IT Integration  
February 2006 
Enterprise Integration Research Agenda 
February 2006 
Author: Peter S. Kastner, VP Enterprise Integration Research, peter.kastner@aberdeen.com. 
 
