Via FAX (512) 838-7939
June 28, 1995

Ms. Sandra Miron
IBM
11501 Burnet Road
Building 903 Mailstop 9331
Austin, TX 78758

Dear Sandra:
Aberdeen Group is pleased to have been selected by IBM to present at a series of Issues on Databases educational forums for marketing specialists and selected IBM Business partners. This letter outlines our understanding of the engagement.

Statement of Work
Aberdeen Group will develop and present a module for an RS/6000 database marketing class being coordinated by the RS/6000 Division Marketing Programs department. The module will be presented on the second day of the 1.5-day class. The duration will be about four hours, including breaks.

The training module aims to improve marketing specialist and Business Partner knowledge of the key issues for dealing with customers and RDBMS partners. Aberdeen will bring its extensive background in consulting to IS executives on database selection, our Database Buyer's Guide research, and in working with all of the database suppliers in articulating database technology into business advantages and benefits.

The training module will cover the following topics:
- The business dynamics driving the need for distributed servers, including competitive advantage, reduced costs, time to market
- Why 9 out of 10 commercial servers sold come with an RDBMS
- Which comes first? The hardware platform or the database?
- The criteria customers use when selecting a database for their hardware platform
- The strengths of the RS/6000 as a database server of choice; how these criteria for meeting business dynamics and database selection criteria tie into the RS/6000's strengths
- How the RS/6000 competes against Sun, HP, AT&T, and DEC
- Strengths, weaknesses, positioning and recommended approaches to selling the market-leading relational databases: DB2/6000, CA-Ingres, Informix, Oracle, and Sybase
- How and how well the market-leading relational database companies leverage the strengths of the RS/6000 with AIX.

The class will be presented three to five times in the U.S. in 1995. The first location is planned for San Jose, California July 25-26. The remaining dates are to be determined by mutual agreement.

Cost And Duration
The services outlined above will be provided over the period from July 1, 1995 until December 31, 1995.
Aberdeen's standard fee for professional services for this service will be $20,000 for research and the first three classes. Standard fees for classes four and five, held at IBM's option, will be $5,000 each. Given the nature of the project, we have proposed a 10% volume discount from our standard professional service schedule which is reflected in the invoice schedule below. We will hold a firm price of $4,500 per U.S. class through December 1995.

Travel and living expenses at our cost to and from each class are additional, and are estimated for budgetary purposes at $2,000 per class. If required, media expenses for 35mm slides are an additional expense to IBM at our cost.

Invoices will be rendered based on the following schedule, plus expenses:
- Research and class 1: $9,000
- Class 2: $4,500
- Class 3: $4,500

General Provisions
In the past, Aberdeen Group has carried out a considerable amount of technical and marketing research in the field covered by this proposal. This experience qualifies us to undertake the assignment defined above, and we expect to continue such work in the future.

To protect your interests, we agree that any confidential information that we develop or have furnished to us by you during the work will be safeguarded in accordance with our established professional standards. Furthermore, it is our practice in considering assignments to decline them whenever it appears to us at all probable that our experience with a past or present client might be inappropriate in the new assignment.

In conjunction with this engagement, Aberdeen will grant a non-exclusive license for IBM to internally use the class presentation materials until June 30, 1996.

Staff Responsibility
I will be responsible for preparing and delivering the class module. A biography is attached.

Sincerely,
Peter S. Kastner

PETER S. KASTNER
Peter S. Kastner is Group Vice President of Aberdeen Group, Inc., responsible for Aberdeen's Corporate Computing practice. He is one of the industry's leading analysts of trends in online transaction processing (OLTP), client/server architectures, distributed commercial systems development, and commercial benchmark auditing and analysis. He is responsible for Aberdeen's series of Distributed, Open Production Systems Buying Guides which guide IS managers in selecting relational databases, client-server development environments, workgroup, complex decision support and client-server application platforms.

Mr. Kastner has conducted numerous client studies in distributed operating systems and database management systems software. He is active in Aberdeen's end user consulting practice, working with clients to rightsize and distribute their production systems.

He authored Aberdeen's 1990 study Transaction Processing into the 1990s: The Hardware Suppliers, the 1991 study Evaluating Options in Microprocessor Multiprocessing, and a 1992 study on clustering technology. He speaks regularly at seminars, conferences, and sales training classes on topical industry issues, and has spoken on behalf of Apple Computer, AT&T, Computer Associates and CA Ingres, CEO Institute, Digital Equipment, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Informix, Oracle, Software AG, Software 2000, and Stratus Computer.

Mr. Kastner has considerable expertise in computer performance and capacity measurement. He was an auditor of benchmarks of and is now an industry advisor to the Transaction Processing Council, has served as an expert witness in several legal cases, and is frequently quoted in the trade press.

Prior to joining Aberdeen Group in 1988, Mr. Kastner was a marketing executive with Digital Equipment, Prime Computer, and Stratus Computer. Over a decade as a consultant and group manager with Arthur D. Little Inc., Mr. Kastner was involved in dozens of complex systems development projects spanning the manufacturing, banking and financial services, health care, and government markets, and including mainframe, minicomputer, and desktop systems.
