SOURCE_URL: http://au.sys-con.com/node/247398/print
MIME: text/html

Print Story Close Window Print Story SOA Adoption at 90 Percent?! Well, we should all rest easy now that the work is completed with SOA, right? What's that? Well, according to a new report from the Aberdeen Group, "nine of every 10 companies are adopting or have adopted service-oriented architectures and will exit 2006 with SOA planning, design, and programming experience." The report, based on an Aberdeen benchmark survey of more than 120 IT and business professionals, indicates a growing and widespread acceptance of SOA technology, especially among large enterprises (at least US$1 billion in annual revenue). But migrating to an SOA doesn't come without a price, the survey also found. "Redesigning business processes, high IT integration costs, and customization challenges are eating up 40% of the IT budget in integration expenditures," said Peter S. Kastner, Vice President and Research Director for Enterprise Integration at Aberdeen and author of the report. "SOA is broadly seen as a real technology step forward, with the largest companies, who have the biggest integration problems, leading the way." Enterprises are taking three distinct approaches to SOA adoption, according to the report: * SOA "Lite": This approach is based on open-source programs and industry standards and is best suited for small companies, lightweight integration, and simple Web services such as employee self-service. * Enterprise SOA: This is a suite of SOA middleware for mission-critical and complex installations, best suited for mid-to-large companies. * SOA ERP. This approach offers mid-size and some large companies an entry to SOA via extensions to enterprise resource planning (ERP) application software. Aberdeen Group, Inc. (which is not based in Aberdeen, but that was a nice pic of it above anyway) provides fact-based research and insights focused on the global, technology-driven value chain. Aberdeen's benchmarking, market and solution assessments, sales acceleration programs, and conferences support Global 5000 value chain and technology executives and the solution providers who serve them, the company says. © 2008 SYS-CON Media Inc.