
===== NCR-ORCL-letter-touts-psk.txt =====
                                             500 Oracle Parkway
            ORACLE                           Redwood Shores
                                             California 94065



                                         Free Seminar
                                         Hew cusSemer-drivon
                                         infformaSion will boos?
                                         your company's revenue
                                         opporlluniSics and
                                         operational ottisioncy.


                            Priority Reservation Number...WAA1CC



Mr. John Q. Sample
123 Main Street
Anycity, Anystate 12345-6789

Dear Mr. Sample:

Businesses have come to realize that the key to survival and growth
is focusing on their customers. Decreased customer loyalty and
global competition make it imperative that organizations build
strong customer relationships.

That’s why one of the emerging trends of the ’90s is a shift to
customer-driven business strategies. - T-o—remain compet-i-tive-, you-----
need to:

• Identify and capture information on your customers’ changing
  needs
• Provide information to your people whenever and wherever they
  need it so they can better service your customers
• Respond faster than your competition

Find out how business solutions that leverage distributed
information about your customers will give you the competitive
edge. Attend a free, thought-provoking half-day seminar
sponsored by AT&T/NCR and Oracle.

        Transitioning to Customer-Driven Information Solutions
    Keynote Speaker: Peter Kastner, Vice President, Aberdeen Group

        Date:    Tuesday, October 12
        City:    Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
        Time:    Registration and Continental Breakfast:
                 8:30 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
        Program: 9:00 a.m. - Noon


Spend just three hours at Transitioning to Customer-Driven
Information Solutions, and you’ll get a clear picture of the
resources available to get, move, and use customer information
throughout your enterprise.

You’ll hear noted consultant Peter Kastner discuss how to:
• Take advantage of emerging technologies to build consumer-focused
  information solutions
• Leverage your investment in your current systems while
  transitioning to a distributed environment
• Use your customer-focused applications to develop new revenue
  opportunities and improve your operational efficiency

And, you'll hear how companies today are using and benefiting from
their AT&T/NCR and Oracle solutions.

Just what makes the AT&T/NCR - Oracle partnership worth a closer
look?

AT&T/NCR and Oracle have jointly formed strategic business units
dedicated to developing business solutions for you. Oracle's
products run across NCR's complete line of hardware platforms from
workstations to massively-parallel computers. Oracle and AT&T/NCR
are working together to bring exciting new voice, data and
messaging technology into realworld applications. And AT&T/NCR and
Oracle have the financial stability to partner with you for years
to come.

Together, AT&T/NCR and Oracle have the communications and
information expertise to give you better access to more information
any time, anywhere. If you"don't have the AT&T/NCR - Oracle story,
you haven't covered all the basics on IS solutions that will help
your company compete and thrive in the next decade and beyond.

Reserve your place at Transitioning to Customer-Driven Information
Solutions today. Return the enclosed reservation card or call
1-800-442-8649, ext. 24, and focus your IS strategy on your




Oracle U.S.A.                       NCR U.S. Group
Oracle Corporation                  AT&T/NCR

P.S. Peter Kastner is one of the world's most popular speakers on
     information technology, and space is limited at the free
     AT&T/NCR - Oracle seminar, Transitioning to Customer-Driven
     Information Solutions. Reserve your place today by calling
     1-800-442-8649, ext. 24.
