


                 SARS May Impact Global Electronics Industry

Keywords: SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome, semiconductors, digital
consumer technology, WiFi, Taiwan, PRC, Singapore, Hong Kong, China,
Peoples Republic of China, electronics industry, economic trends,
electronic assembly, electronic manufacturing, supply chain disruption,
electronics logistics, disruption, just-in-time, dependable supply, NEC,
Philips, Oki, Elipda, Infineon, Sony, Dell, Broadcom, Cirrus Logic,
Conexant, National Semiconductor
     The global electronics Industry is built on the principles of high
         volumes and low costs.  In recent years, getting the lowest
       semiconductor and electronics assembly costs has translated to
   manufacturing in the Peoples’ Republic of China.  But a recent outbreak
    of a contagious and fatal virus may break one of the oft over-looked
            rules of the electronics industry: dependable supply.





Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) Disrupts Major Semiconductor and
Electronic Equipment Manufacturing Region

AsiaPacific represents the dominant geographic source of both semiconductor
production and consumption, with the Peoples’ Republic of China (PRC) being
the current high-growth country.  Asia Pacific consumed 37% or $52B of 2002
semiconductor production.  Semiconductor Industry Association forecasts for
2003 suggest those numbers will increase to 38% and $65B respectively, with
the PRC alone accounting for 11%. Asia Pacific also represents the dominant
source of laptops, desktops and low-end networking equipment, with 85+% of
all WiFi gear made in Taiwan and the PRC, as well as virtually all consumer
electronics, as well as toys.

Manufacturing and R&D cost advantages have resulted in significant
transfers of system manufacturing capacity from Korea, Taiwan, and Japan to
the PRC — Sony just announced that all Playstation manufacturing will be
done in the PRC.  In addition, eight new PRC 8-inch semiconductor plants
are under construction, with production commitments to external firms such
as NEC, Philips, Oki, Elipda, Infineon, and others.

Unfortunately, SARS is getting in the way of this electronics mini-boom.
The SARS outbreak, which is currently sweeping the world, originated in
Guangdong Province in the PRC, adjacent to Hong Kong.  Severe outbreaks are
reported in the cities of Guangzhou and Shenzen, both major electronics
manufacturing centers.  As of the end of March, there were 792 reported
cases in the province and 34 deaths.  The PRC has not been forthcoming
about the situation, and until recently claimed that the outbreak had been
contained. Now cases are admitted in Beijing, Shanghai, and Shanxi—all loci
of electronic or semiconductor activity.

It has also spread via Hong Kong to Singapore and Taiwan.  So far no cases
have been reported in Japan or South Korea, the two other major electronics
sources in the region.  However 77 Japanese tourists recently stayed in the
Hong Kong hotel where SARS first appeared.  Meanwhile, Hong Kong has
quarantined over a 1,000 people and closed all schools, as has Singapore.
In addition, Motorola has temporarily closed a cell phone manufacturing
facility in Singapore after authorities quarantined 305 workers due to SARS
exposure.

Taiwan has 48 reported cases in five cities and counties.  They have
announced home quarantine for several hundred people and are delivering
food and drink to those affected.  In addition, mass transport is being
disinfected.  Six employees of CTIC, a Taiwanese construction company,
returned from Beijing via Hong Kong with the disease, prompting a corporate
shutdown.  Many Taiwanese companies are discontinuing travel to Hong Kong
and the PRC.  Compal, a major manufacturer of laptops for Dell and HP, has
barred employees from these countries until the epidemic has been
controlled.  Sony has indefinitely postponed a Taiwan procurement
conference scheduled for April, citing the Iraq war rather than SARS.


Issue at Hand:  Impact on the Electronics Industry

It is difficult to estimate the impact on regional electronics production
and the aggressive disease expansion that is now underway.  Travel between
Taiwan and the PRC has historically been via Hong Kong for political
reasons — even without corporate bans, we suspect employees will be
reluctant to go for obvious reasons.  Companies such as Broadcom, Cirrus
Logic, Conexant, and National Semiconductor maintain teams of applications
engineers in the region.  These engineers travel to customer sites to
provide design support for use of their companies semiconductors.  Most
manufacturing companies can’t get new designs into the market, or debug
problems in current product without this support.  At a minimum, schedules
will slip.

Should the epidemic takes hold near major electronics manufacturing sites,
product sourced there will become in short supply. Local semiconductor
manufacturers will suffer diminished capacity utilization — which could
ripple into reductions in capital spending.  In short, another mini down
cycle.  Further, external manufacturers relying on Taiwanese or PRC
components and semiconductors may find themselves in the same situation.
In this case, the kingdom could be lost for lack of a nail — or a
capacitor.  The PRC is the source of many electronic components and low-
level assemblies.  For example, AC-to-DC power supplies — the little black
cubes that clutter power strips — are invariably made in the PRC.   A
laptop can be assembled anywhere, but it cannot be sold without a power
supply!  Thus, the dependable supply of key-component building-blocks is
threatened by SARS, not just the assembly plants in China.

If China were hypothetically quarantined, it would take literally months of
24x7 work by manufacturing planners and logistics mavens to create
qualified alternate production sources.  That would mean nuclear winter to
the semiconductor and electronics industry.

More likely at the moment is a disruption of airplane flights, which
typically carry high-value or rush priority electronics goods.  Ships,
which carry the bulk of assembled electronics goods, will not be
significantly delayed once they leave port because the SARS virus appears
to have an incubation period of less than ten days — cross the Pacific
without symptoms and there are no public health problems.  The question
becomes how to get ships in and out of a quarantined port.



SECTION BREAK WARNING:
There is a section break below this paragraph. To view the section break,
click the “show invisibles” icon on the standard Word toolbar (shown
below).

[pic]

Note:  Do not delete this section break to maintain the formatting and
footer for the last page of the Hot Topic.

This section break needs to appear at the bottom of the second-to-last page
of your Hot Topic. Therefore, for a two-page Hot Topic, this section break
needs to appear at the bottom of the first page. The bottom line: Simply
type the text for your last page after the section break.





Aberdeen Observations and Conclusions

It is difficult to gauge how pervasive the SARS epidemic will become in
Asia Pacific.  The Hong Kong case load is growing at about 100 cases a day.
 Inside the PRC is anyone’s guess.  At a minimum, the SARS epidemic will
cause schedule slippages and disrupt the aggressive growth plans that
global electronics companies have for the affected geographies.  Worst
case, it could result in major supply chain disruptions and another
downdraft for an already challenged industry — let’s hope not.  Our
assumption is that the disease can and will be halted by aggressive public
health actions going forward.  If not, then the electronics industry will
be a tiny part of the humanity’s problem.

The deceit of the PRC government in hiding what has become a serious global
health threat will not be quickly forgotten.  The delicate balance between
tight PRC government control and laissez faire capitalism in China is still
at the “ironing out the kinks” stage.  After all, the government is often a
major investor on PRC companies.  New outside capital and equity
investments in the PRC and Hong Kong are unlikely to close until the public
health situation is stabilized, which will be measured in months.  Even
then, a new level of suspicion by investors of the government’s ability to
protect investments will take years to dispel.  After all, low-cost
manufacturing and disrupted supply are oil and water in a just-in-time
world.

China has lost the gilt on the lily for the time being.  Stung by harsh
world criticism, the government may turn inward and be more hostile to
further investments and market-opening initiatives.  Surely Japanese and
Korean firms will slow their rush to heretofore low-cost China.  They were
late to make the move, and will benefit from this hiccup because they still
have their current factories in place, in most cases.  It is the Western
technology companies that rushed into the PRC, and which now face disrupted
supply chains.  However, the entire electronics assembly industry has a
critical, no-second-source dependence — for the moment — on components made
in the PRC.

We hope that the respective governments of the countries suffering this
contagion identify an effective containment strategy and treatment quickly
for both the industry, and, more importantly, for the people who have
become infected.  However, the U.S. government’s policy makers should
contemplate the economic consequences to the trillion dollar global
electronics industry should public health measures fail in the PRC and
other affected countries.

                                              ~ Russ Craig and Peter Kastner

                                  Abstract

Hot Topic title:

Company Name:

Date:

Body:

Author: Russ Craig

Coverage Area: Digital Consumer Technology & Semiconductors



-----------------------
Hot Topic


