AberdeenGro
up
Internet
Infrastructures:
1998 
Practice 
Summary
May 1998
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
One Boston Place
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
USA
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
www.aberdeen.com
2
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Aberdeen Group is a Boston-based, computer and 
communications consulting and market-research 
organization.
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select 
group of domestic and international clients.    Each requires 
a combination of strategic advice and pragmatic, 
experience-based action plans.    Assignments range from 
corporate and product positioning and organizational 
planning to in-depth market segment research.    Aberdeen 
consults on mergers and acquisitions, corporate positioning 
and investor relations, transaction-processing benchmarks, 
and has special expertise in software and midrange    
computer markets.
In carrying out assignments, Aberdeen uses a proprietary, 
comprehensive, analytical framework providing fresh 
insight into the complex future of computing and 
communications, both from a technological and a market- 
dynamics perspective.    Aberdeen also offers retainer-fee 
programs to a group of continuing clients.
Aberdeen principals and staff are recognized industry 
figures with hundreds of years of combined high-tech 
industry, research and financial community experience 
among them.    They are quoted extensively in industry trade 
and business publications.    Each is a frequent conference 
and seminar speaker.
In addition to client-related research and consulting, 
Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, Aberdeen 
Viewpoints and Profiles, which summarize its analysis and 
research findings.
Information contained in this publication has been obtained from 
sources we believe to be reliable, but is not warranted by us.    Opinions 
reflect judgment at the time and are subject to change without notice.
3
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations 
mentioned in this publication are the property of their respective 
holders.
Warning:    This publication is protected by United States copyright law 
and international treaties.    Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents 
of this publication are copyrighted by Aberdeen Group, Inc., and may not 
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means without prior written consent.    Unauthorized 
reproduction or distribution of this publication, or any portion of it, may 
result in severe civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the 
maximum extent necessary to protect the rights of the publisher. 
© 1998 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
4
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTERNET ARCHITECTURES PRACTICE 
V
Strategic Market Questions
v
Audience for This Report
vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
7
Key Findings
8
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
11
Key Aberdeen Findings
11
THE INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE DEFINED
15
How the Internet Infrastructure Fits into Network Services
15
Core Internet Infrastructure Components
15
Application Development Environment
15
Application Runtime Environment
16
Service Middleware
16
ISP Services
16
How a Functioning/Integrated System Works
17
The Advantages of an Integrated Solution
17
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
19
Impact of Major IT Trends
19
Supplier Success Factors
20
User Success Factors
20
SUPPLIER ABSTRACTS
23
Borland International Inc.
23
5
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Hewlett-Packard Company
24
IBM Corporation
24
Microsoft Corporation
26
Netscape Communications Corporation.
27
Aberdeen Conclusion
28
Novell, Inc.
28
Oracle Corporation
28
Sun Microsystems Computer Company
29
Sybase, Inc.
30
6
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Preface
Internet Infrastructure Practice
Description, Focus and Benefits
The Internet Infrastructure practice focuses on the infrastructure 
needed to achieve robust, scaleable Internet implementations such 
as Intranets and Extranets.    It particularly focuses on the 
"frameworks" (developer APIs and class libraries) and supporting 
software on Internet clients, application servers, and back-end 
database servers.    Thus, the Internet Architectures practice 
examines the application of development, middleware, groupware, 
database, network, browser, Web server, Web application server, 
and systems management software to the job of supporting and 
scaling Internet applications.
Internet architectures are at a critical point in their evolution.    
Frameworks are proliferating, but are not widely adopted by 
independent software developers; the necessary infrastructure is 
being created, but few if any have been able to use it effectively to 
handle the most overloaded Web sites and scale them cost-
effectively; and the first bloom is off Java’s rose.    In this situation, 
Aberdeen emphasizes assessments of third-party suppliers’ ability 
to provide fully integrated Web architecture products and services, 
and to include all the necessary components to adequately scale.
The Internet Architectures practice is the cutting edge of the 
Network Services area.    Because the Internet is key to most major 
supplier and IS strategies today, and because Internet technology is 
moving so fast, Internet architectures are now the proving ground 
of network services.
Strategic Market Questions

Do frameworks matter? Whose framework will win out – 
Microsoft, Oracle, or a collection of suppliers? 

When will Java be ready for prime time? 

What middleware technologies do users really need – ORBs, 
push technology, HTTP servers, JavaServers, DCOM and/or 
IIOP? 
7
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 

What pragmatic approaches can be taken to integrate 
current systems, including custom applications, electronic 
mail, and databases, into the new Internet Infrastructure? 

What is the best combination of local and backend software 
and hardware systems needed to support both immediate 
multimedia development needs and long-term scalability 
requirements? 

How can solutions be designed that make the browser wars 
irrelevant? 

How should users employ systems management solutions to 
turn early Web-site chaos into a long-term, maintainable 
Intranet or Extranet?
Audience for This Report
This practice summary is aimed at key IS decision makers facing 
Internet acquisition and deployment decisions, as well as 
suppliers making Internet product-development investment 
choices.    For IS, the summary focuses on helping these IS 
buyers evaluate and select development and deployment 
environments and standards to create an effective Internet 
Infrastructure.    For suppliers, this practice summary identifies 
how the Internet is changing the market for the services that 
make up the Internet Infrastructure, including directories, mail, 
application runtime environments, groupware, and security.
8
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter One
Executive Summary
Internet Infrastructure is comprised of several computing and 
communications services that enable distributed computing 
outside the corporate firewall.    While current Network Operating 
Systems, such as NDS from Novell and NT from Microsoft, provide 
excellent services in a homogenous environment, the translators 
and gateways they use to integrate to the Internet decrease 
function, performance and reliability.    These Network Operating 
Systems, recognizing the need to integrate with the Internet, have 
begun to adopt some core Internet services, but are likely to always 
be a few steps behind.    Therefore, users are beginning to develop a 
wider array of infrastructure functions to carry out their Internet 
tasks:    an Internet Infrastructure.
Because many companies have discovered the value of Internet 
connectivity, Internet services, based on industry and de-facto 
standards, already represent a significant component of most 
enterprises’ current computing infrastructure, and Aberdeen 
research indicates that this penetration will accelerate.    
Companies will become ever more reliant on the Internet as they 
try to become more sensitive to customer needs, to eliminate 
inefficiencies in the supply side infrastructure, to mine wider 
sources of information to gain better intelligence on operations, 
and to begin to outsource (and thereby deal with remotely) services 
and organizations that provide no core differentiation to the 
business.
These business changes are being implemented by leading-edge 
companies today.    These companies are finding that the necessary 
new applications and capabilities must be implemented on an 
Internet-connected computing infrastructure — an Internet 
Infrastructure — that supports mission-critical operations.    
Unfortunately, today’s typical Internet infrastructure is based on 
technologies that are both immature and rapidly evolving, a 
combination not conducive to enterprise computing.    Therefore, 
the aim of the Internet Infrastructure practice, and of this practice 
summary, is to explain when, where, and how an Internet 
Infrastructure can be effectively applied to current business 
initiatives, and to study the Internet Infrastructure’s component 
9
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
services, the networking and systems needed to support them, and 
their implementation in real life.
Key Findings
·
The applicability of the Internet Infrastructure to large scale 
computing problems has been broadened significantly with the 
recent addition of CORBA and Java.    These network-based 
standards for object-oriented computing have fundamentally 
changed the industry, and will impact both business 
relationships and software development and deployment.    To 
understand how widespread this impact has been and how 
much greater it will be, consider the fact that Internet standards 
were once limited to supporting only specific data types (SMTP 
supported e-mail, NNTP supported News Groups, and HTTP 
supported HTML).    All of these protocols can now transport any 
data type, including distributed objects based on Java, because 
they have adopted the MIME distributed-object e-mail standard.
·
The introduction of Java by Sun Microsystems has increased 
application portability, a capability that has captured the 
imagination of the trade press and programmers everywhere.    
Perhaps less well understood is that Java can also reduce the 
need for applications to agree on data formats and types before 
communicating, a major limitation of all other protocols in the 
past.    This is possible because with Java the entire object is 
sent, and the object incorporates not just the data but the 
application that can properly access that data and expose it to 
the user or to other applications.    In other words, Java on the 
Internet can be a major aid to application interoperability 
across and beyond the enterprise, a vital tool in such enterprise 
efforts as extra-enterprise Infinite Resource Planning (IRP) and 
Enterprise Application Integration.
·
CORBA provides a standard set of computing services and data 
mappings that enable different computing environments to 
communicate.    Using CORBA services, two Java applications, in 
different computing environments, can effectively 
communicate.    Using CORBA data mappings, two applications 
written in different programming    languages, executing in 
different operating environments, can still interoperate.    Thus, 
CORBA can extend Java’s capabilities in application 
interoperability to include legacy and disparate platforms.
10
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
·
Aberdeen calls the application development and deployment 
environment that adheres to all of the above technologies 
Internet Object Computing or IOC.    The feature that most 
separates the IOC from any other environment is that, while it 
can exist in a closed environment, it is most relevant when 
implemented in the public network.    Today, business has come 
to depend on ISP’s adoption and support for Internet mail 
(SMTP), Internet Directory (DNS), and other standards based 
services.    These services will rapidly expand to include other 
IOC services, including Public Certificates, LDAP, and Private 
Virtual Networking.    As the services become more pervasive 
and trusted, business will move from bi-lateral agreements 
using a single agreed upon network provider, to Internet Object 
Computing.
·
Implementing such distributed-computing capabilities across 
corporate boundaries, and within the public domain, will 
require IS to rethink completely the enterprise’s business 
relationships and Internet infrastructure.    Deploying solutions 
using proprietary protocols can increase security and reliability, 
but greatly diminishes the audience, increases the deployment 
cost, and often unwittingly establishes closed user groups.    To 
remain competitive, companies will need to adopt a 
public/extra-enterprise Internet Infrastructure wherever 
possible.
·
Microsoft has developed a competing model for Extranet 
computing called Distributed InterNet Computing (DNA).    This 
architecture is based on the Microsoft COM+ object 
implementation which is implemented in the NT Operating 
System.    The objective of DNA is to implement relevant COM+ 
services on multiple platforms, and this has already begun as 
can be seen in the chart presented in Chapter 5.    The key 
differentiating factor between these competing architectures is 
that while COM+ can expose an application from any 
environment to another, as long as that environment supports 
COM+, it can not intended to make applications portable across 
different systems.    This is a unique attribute of Java, and is the 
attribute Microsoft currently refuses to adopt.    In the Microsoft 
world, applications are wed to a platform, and exposed across 
the network to other environments.    CORBA accomplishes this 
in the IOC world, while Java also enables program portability.
·
The stakes for users in choosing an Internet Infrastructure are 
high.    The rapid pace of technology introduction and 
11
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
maturation (e.g., Java) makes assessing which technologies are 
“ready for deployment” a difficult exercise, and the price of a 
wrong decision can be unreliable applications and networks, if 
the user gets too far out in front, and falling behind the 
competition, if the user plays it too safe.    Since applications 
take months to develop and test, making the right decision 
requires making large assumptions regarding technology 
stability and adoption rates. 
·
The stakes for suppliers are just as high.    Knowing which 
protocols and standards to implement today, which to invest in 
for tomorrow, and which to promote to gain a competitive 
advantage, can make the difference between supplier success 
and failure. 
·
The Internet Infrastructure market continues to be 
exceptionally volatile.    It is seeing unprecedented market 
upheaval, fast-changing supplier alliances, venomous supplier 
animosity and lawsuits, user-inspired lobbies with exceptional 
power, government anti-trust investigations, and incredible 
market-development efforts by all the computer manufacturers. 
This mix of passion and incredible capital investment will 
continue to make rational decision-making difficult, even 
though the stakes are now higher than ever before.
·
Internet Infrastructure suppliers have limited interest in true 
interoperability or portability as they focus their energies on 
differentiating their products via scalability and reliability.    IS 
managers, comfortable with selection criteria weighted in favor 
of reliability over ubiquity, are falling into these traditional 
supplier proprietary traps, with the partial exception of the Java 
market.    Suppliers are also wasting energy developing new, 
complex technologies that offer only limited end-user benefits 
beyond those already addressed by e-mail and are therefore 
rejected by empowered consumer-market end users.    For 
example, consumers are driving the market’s rejection of push 
and publish/subscribe.
12
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Two
Summary of Findings
By its nature, the Internet Infrastructure practice covers a wide range 
of technologies.    It studies how these technologies are combined to 
create an open computing infrastructure, and how suppliers and IS 
organizations adopt and utilize these technologies.    Figure 1 provides 
a graphical representation of a runtime environment based on 
standards that adheres to the Internet Object Computing Framework 
infrastructure.
Figure 1: Internet Object Computing Framework
Services
  JVM
Mail
Security
HTTP
Directory
Database & 
Transactions
Object Request
Broker
Apps
Apps
Apps
Mail
Security
Database
Directory
Web 
Transactions
Standard Services
SERVER
Source:    AberdeenGroup, April 1998
Key Aberdeen Findings
1. Vendors, focused on making development and 
deployment environments scaleable and reliable, have 
done so to the detriment of interoperability and 
portability.    Traditional IS managers, comfortable with 
selection criteria weighted in favor of reliability over 
13
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
ubiquity, are falling into these traditional supplier 
proprietary traps.
2. The overall market size for Java will be significant, 
although its overall market share can not yet be predicted 
because of the market bifurcation caused by Microsoft’s 
adoption of its own alternative approach.
3. Despite the ubiquitous presence of e-mail, suppliers and 
developers have consistently underestimated the market 
appeal of this messaging technology in favor of more 
technically complex, and less end-user friendly solutions 
such as push and publish/subscribe technology.
4. Directories will be the core of the public infrastructure 
and will permeate into the corporate infrastructure as 
well.    Most if not all proprietary directories are headed 
for extinction, as the Internet standard that defines 
Directory access and the directory schema, called LDAP, 
becomes entrenched.    Even the proprietary directories 
that purport to be LDAP capable will eventually need to 
actually become interchangeable with any LDAP 
compliant implementation.    The Internet directory will 
provide the infrastructure for security and management 
of application platforms, and for maintaining 
organizational roles and hierarchy.    Database and 
Enterprise Resource Planning providers (e.g., PeopleSoft, 
SAP, and Baan) that don’t come to grips with this new role 
for the directory are at risk of losing their current market 
leadership positions.
5. While suppliers offer environments that incorporate all of 
the services that combined make up the Internet 
Infrastructure, in most instances companies have already 
implemented some of the services using older proprietary 
technology, and therefore must find a mechanism to 
either establish a gateway to the Internet, or discover a 
cost-effective method to migrate to an Internet standard. 
This corporate need has established a healthy market for 
gateway products and for systems integrators.
6. Aberdeen research indicates that the role of Internet 
outsourcers will increase substantially over the next 5 
years.    When confronted with the need to implement 
migration from a proprietary mail or directory system to 
one based on standards, users find that the costs in 
software and hardware are insignificant compared to the 
14
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
cost of hiring experts in the field for the design, 
administration and maintenance of the service.    The 
Internet itself offers a mechanism to outsource all aspects 
of these services.
7. Enterprise Java Beans (EJB) and COM+ (also called 
Distributed COM, or DCOM by Microsoft marketing) are 
the two viable cores of an Internet Infrastructure that IS 
can adopt.    While the EJB environment is extremely 
immature, a rare supplier alliance has been established to 
share technology and resources to firm up this 
environment.    Still, Microsoft has a large installed base of 
COM-based applications, and even though the move to 
COM+ demands a new approach to programming and the 
utilization of new services only just being introduced into 
the NT infrastructure (Message Queue and Transaction 
Services), the installed base of developers clearly favors 
Microsoft.
8. As previously described, supplier alliances around Java 
and CORBA have been a major influence on the 
development of an Internet Infrastructure, and despite 
Microsoft’s rejection of Java-the-environment, Aberdeen 
is positive that Java’s ability to communicate across 
boundaries and encapsulate data will lead to its 
widespread adoption within the Internet Infrastructure.    
However, Aberdeen finds that Microsoft is not locking 
itself out of the cross-platform computing marketplace, 
but will invest whatever is needed to upgrade COM+ to 
deliver comparable functionality.
9. Even as the major suppliers partner to advance Java (and 
at least in some cases to combat Microsoft), there are 
many needs that will likely be addressed by start-ups.    As 
an example, no major supplier appears willing to 
establish the products needed to integrate the Java 
environment with the Microsoft environment.
10.Aberdeen research has also demonstrated that porting a 
current application over to Java is rarely a satisfactory 
solution.    Since Java is not just a language, but also a 
communications environment, applications must be 
rewritten to work effectively within these constraints.
11.The major computing suppliers have been rushing into 
the Enterprise JavaBeans (EJB) market with environments 
15
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
that leverage their proprietary, but proven, computing 
infrastructures.    While this approach rapidly delivers a 
robust EJB environment, users should be wary of too-fast 
delivery of EJB, as it may indicate that the supplier 
achieved robustness at the expense of standards and 
interoperability.
12.Aberdeen research indicates that companies, especially 
start-ups and leading edge adopters, are pushing the 
envelope of Internet-Architecture technology to gain a 
competitive advantage, and to gain market share from 
competitors.    There are spectacular examples of success 
(Amazon.com) and failure (Time Inc./Pathfinder).
13.Three issues prevent broader acceptance of the Internet 
Infrastructure for deployment of enterprise-class 
applications:    Security, Trust, and Reliability.    Security 
and trust are easily resolved in the short term through 
bilateral arrangements between partners within and 
outside the enterprise.    This approach avoids the use of 
the Internet’s infrastructure, replacing it with proprietary 
protocols instead.    Before these problems can be resolved 
within the Internet Infrastructure, enterprises must 
implement directory support for security certificates, the 
public must gain greater confidence in the current 
encryption protocols, and a web of trust between end 
users and organizations must be established.    While the 
technological issues to accomplish this are not 
insignificant, they pale in comparison to the problems 
involved in changing perceptions and confidence.
14.While both Microsoft and the Java alliance generally 
support Internet Services, they disagree completely on 
what environment will execute applications.    The Java 
alliance expects the runtime to be EJB, implemented on 
multiple platforms (hardware and OS).    Microsoft expects 
the runtime to be primarily NT, with NT and COM+ 
executed on multiple hardware platforms.    This battle 
between industry giants will fragment the market over 
the next 1-2 years, making portability and interoperability 
more difficult to achieve.
15.As the services of the Internet have expanded upscale to 
include reliability and expandability, IS costs have 
increased to the point where they are beginning to match 
historical costs in the computer industry for these 
16
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
services.    IS should therefore not expect a “free” 
enterprise-scale Internet Infrastructure implementation.
17
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Three
The Internet Infrastructure Defined
How the Internet Infrastructure Fits into Network Services
Internet Infrastructure is the infrastructure needed to achieve 
robust, scaleable Internet implementations such as Intranets and 
Extranets.    It particularly includes “frameworks” (developer APIs 
and class libraries) and supporting software on Internet clients, 
application servers, and back-end database servers.    Thus, the 
Internet Infrastructure includes the application of development, 
middleware, groupware, database, network, browser, Web server, 
Web application server, and systems management software to the 
job of supporting and scaling distributed Internet applications.
Internet Infrastructures are at a critical point in their evolution.    
Frameworks are proliferating, but are not widely adopted by ISVs; 
few if any have been able to use an Internet Infrastructure 
effectively to handle the most overloaded Web sites and scale them 
cost-effectively; and the first bloom is off Java’s rose.    In this 
situation, Aberdeen emphasizes assessments of third-party 
suppliers’ ability to provide fully integrated Web architecture 
products and services, and to include all the necessary components 
to adequately scale.    Our assessments change over time.
Internet Infrastructures is the cutting edge of the Network Services 
area.    Because the Internet is key to most major supplier and IS 
strategies today, and because Internet technology is moving so fast, 
Internet architectures are now the proving ground of network 
services.
Core Internet Infrastructure Components
There are four key components that comprise the Internet 
Infrastructure.    These components provide the support needed to 
build, deploy, and manage enterprise-scale Internet applications 
(shown in Figure 2):    the Application Development Environment 
(ADE), the Application Runtime Environment (ARE), the Service 
Middleware Components (SMC), and the services provided by the 
Internet Service Provider (ISP), e.g., e-mail.
18
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Application Development Environment
The ADE is at its core a standard development toolset and 
framework.    However, the goals of the Internet enterprise-
application developer have a significant impact on user 
requirements for the ADE.    The ADE must allow users to distribute 
(or distributed itself) a developed application to multiple physical 
locations, on multiple platforms, with the need to interoperate in a 
secure, trusted, fashion.    If the goal of the developer is to leverage 
the existing computer infrastructure, including legacy applications, 
then the ADE should provide facilities to integrate applications 
based on these fundamentally different environments.
Application Runtime Environment
The ARE includes those features that support running a production 
enterprise-scale Internet application, including Network Operating 
System, development-toolset runtime facilities, and often the Java 
environment.    These tend to be bundled in with other products, 
and are therefore typically straightforward to deploy.
Service Middleware
The key technologies of Internet-Architecture middleware are 
support for distributed objects (e.g., ORB, repository, and 
application/transaction server).    Beyond this, if the application 
does not need authentication or encryption, and will only require 
basic messaging services such as an interface to the HTTP server or 
to send messages to mail users, then there are few requirements 
driving the Service Middleware component other than those for 
any middleware.    On the other hand, if the application must 
perform authentication, directory lookups, or application-to-
application messaging to a broad range of remote systems, then the 
middleware infrastructure will need to be based on open standards 
and be especially robust.
ISP Services
ISP-supplied services include basic network connectivity, e-mail, 
Web Hosting, and newsgroup support.    Today, implementing 
distributed applications on an Internet Infrastructure runs into the 
greatest difficulties (bandwidth, difficulties in pushing the 
application to the client) when the application must be sent to an 
end user’s system via an ISP service (e.g., downloading a Java 
applet).    The ISP’s must work together to enable special Internet 
services that guarantee end-to-end bandwidth, latency, and 
availability.    Until that time, developers must try to    minimize 
bandwidth utilization by limiting the size of the “client download.” 
19
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
This is accomplished by executing as much of the application as 
practical on the server, and delivering the results by e-mail or via 
the Web.
The Internet Infrastructure is perhaps identified most closely with 
the battle between Microsoft and those vendors committed to Java, 
and indeed the solutions brought to market can be segmented into 
those that are Java-centric, COM-centric, and “straddling the 
middle”, a more pragmatic approach that Aberdeen research 
indicates developers appreciate.    Another practical approach to 
segmenting the Internet Infrastructure market is to look at the 
vendor solutions relative to the technical areas (ADE, ARE, SME, 
ISP) the solution integrates.
How a Functioning/Integrated System Works
Figure 1 shows how the components of an Internet architecture can fit 
together to support enterprise-scale applications.
Figure 2: Components of the Internet Infrastructure 
Mail
Security
HTTP
Directory
Database & 
Transactions
Object Request
Broker
Apps
Application
Development
Environment
Enterprise Java Beans OR COM+
Application
 Runtime Environment
ISP
Public Directory
Certificate Server
Public Mail Server
Internet
Service Middleware
Source:    AberdeenGroup, April 1998
20
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The Advantages of an Integrated Solution
A business that has embraced the Internet Infrastructure has also 
fundamentally changed its business model.    Whereas companies 
were once required to run all aspects of their own business, this 
creates huge inefficiencies and redundancy.    Figure 3 shows a 
company before embracing the Internet Business Model, and after. 
The relatively seamless integration between all of the components 
would not be possible without the utilization of the Internet 
Infrastructure.
Figure 3: The New Business Model of the Internet 
Infrastructure
Customers
Employees
Channel
Partners
   Order Entry
Manufacturing
Benefits
Accounting
Order Processing
Customers
Employees
Channel
Partners
Manufacturing
Accounting
Purchasing
Inventory
Order Entry
Benefits
R&D
Administration
Order Processing
R&D
Administration
Typical Business
Internet Partnered Business
Source:    AberdeenGroup, April 1998
The impact of this new business model is profound.    Proper 
authentication of each user is critical, as is knowledge regarding what 
role that user has in the organization.    For example, if Aberdeen 
outsourced employee health benefits to a third part supplier, the 
following issues must be addressed.    First, every Aberdeen employee 
must be easily identified as such, and routed directly to the Aberdeen 
benefits “home page” when connecting to the suppliers system.    Since 
the data is proprietary to Aberdeen, only Aberdeen employees should 
be capable of seeing it.    When an employee wants to see their unique 
21
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
data, again it must be accessible only to them, or their dependents — 
who may not be Aberdeen employees.    In addition, the Human 
Resource administrators at Aberdeen need the ability to modify key 
components of the benefits application.    As roles change within 
Aberdeen, and as employees come and go, this authentication and 
access mechanism must remain trusted and manageable.    E-mail 
communications between all of these participants must also be trusted, 
secured and authenticated, and easily managed.    These are the issues 
confronting Public Key infrastructure, and being addressed through 
LDAP. 
22
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Four
Issues and Challenges
Impact of Major IT Trends
The Internet.    The key Internet issues for Internet Infrastructure 
are improvements in security and robustness.    While the Internet 
Infrastructure market is growing at a phenomenal rate, it cannot 
significantly displace proprietary solutions used in the enterprise 
until the Internet can be trusted.    To address this lack of trust, the 
Internet must deliver a secure environment and a reliable network 
connection (end-to-end network service level guarantees).
The security standards now in place offer a reasonable level of 
security, but still offer little trust.    This is in part because the 
public infrastructure has no mutually accepted authority, and in 
part because Internet security become much more vulnerable 
when it must be integrated with other versions of security (Unix, 
NT, file, host, legacy-application, and so on).    While the ISP’s have 
all made significant investments to provide service level 
guarantees over their own backbones, they have yet to establish 
bilateral agreements to extend these guarantees outside their own 
networks.
Object-oriented application development.    The Internet is a key 
driver of object-oriented application development, and vice versa. 
Because the Internet is exceptionally well suited for distributed 
objects (multimedia-rich, highly distributed, and with an 
architecture that calls for small-application download), 
implementers of Internet applications find that object-oriented 
development tools fit their needs exceptionally well.    Because 
object-oriented development tools allow rapid development of 
distributed complex-data and small-“applet” applications, Internet 
implementers turn naturally to portable/interoperable object-
oriented languages and tools such as Java.
The effect on the Internet Infrastructure has been to place object-
oriented application development at the forefront of user 
requirements.    To deliver an application that is not only relatively 
portable and interoperable but also better able to scale and adapt 
to new technologies, these development toolsets must incorporate 
23
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Internet Infrastructure middleware.    Thus, toolset and Internet 
Infrastructure are increasingly merging.    Aberdeen anticipates 
that in the next 1-2 years, the notion of a development 
“framework” (now so popular among major development-tool 
suppliers) and Internet Infrastructure will look increasingly alike, 
allowing the user to get the “best of both worlds” (object-oriented 
rapid-development technology and Internet deployment 
technology/runtime environment).
Supplier Success Factors
16.New suppliers will find it relatively easy to introduce 
Internet technologies, but should focus on meeting 
customer expectations for reliability and scalability 
established by proprietary products, which the new 
suppliers will find difficult to match.    Proprietary 
suppliers, to maintain the installed base, should attempt 
to make the addition of Internet Services as transparent 
as possible, although this is impossible to achieve 
completely.    To address this difficulty, some traditional 
suppliers are introducing entirely new product lines — 
often a bad move, since it risks losing the installed base.
17.The Internet has dramatically altered distribution 
channels, and every company, in every industry, is 
struggling to adapt.    Successful computer companies will 
leverage each product as a key point of customer 
integration, and expand the company’s influence and 
services through this initial point of entry.    Achieving 
customer satisfaction and delivering remote service for 
an expanding set of products will differentiate the new 
market leaders.    Today, few providers of Internet 
software have embraced the Internet for sales or service 
— both represent an incredible oversight. 
User Success Factors
18.For users of this technology, the challenge is to decide if a 
solution is best implemented so as to support the broad 
Internet audience, while sacrificing some reliability and 
security, or whether it should be implemented so that it is 
reliable and secure, while sacrificing some 
interoperability.    The answer depends on the relative 
importance to the IS manager of new markets and new 
24
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
functionality versus the negative impact of Internet 
problems to the enterprise.    Aberdeen finds that the most 
successful Internet Infrastructure implementers “trust but 
verify”:    they dare to tackle leading-edge technologies, 
but do not implement them without “good enough” initial 
testing.
19.IS managers should work closely with Line of Business 
(LOB) managers to help the LOB manager understand 
how the Internet can be applied, and to work with the 
LOB on a 3-year plan.    IS managers should understand 
that it is far less likely that the enterprise will make wise 
implementation decisions without LOB appreciation of 
how the Internet will change the company’s business 
model and channel model.
20.Typically the most immediate challenge for IS is to decide 
whether to rewrite several core applications that appear 
likely to be central to the Internet application, or to 
simply re-purpose the applications through a new 
computing tier located on a Web server, or to “wrap” the 
current applications in a new object-oriented runtime.    
Aberdeen research indicates that re-purposing is typically 
the best approach, as it enables the company to address 
Year-2000 issues (Does the core application have a 
Year-2000 problem?    If so, can we combine Year-2000-
proofing and Internet implementation?) simultaneously 
with implementing the enterprise’s Internet business 
model.
21.Aberdeen research indicates that companies should avoid 
making the question of Java the central design issue.    
Java represents a powerful new application-deployment 
vehicle, but also a new language and object-oriented 
design methodology to learn.    Therefore, use of Java 
should be based on the importance of the business.    If a 
competitive advantage can be garnered through the use of 
Java, and the risk is manageable, then Java should clearly 
be used.    Moreover, companies should recognize that 
Java can be integrated with current applications, and 
indeed such hybrid solutions will be the rule rather than 
the exception.    Aberdeen predicts that CORBA will play a 
large role in this integration, and possible become the 
lingua franca between different Java environments.    In 
short, using Java for in-browser forms editing makes 
25
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
sense to us today, while server-side custom ERP 
Applications are far more difficult to justify. 
22.When selecting Internet Infrastructure suppliers, users 
should look for two critical attributes: 
23.Does the supplier have in-depth knowledge of the 
currently installed environment?    Can the vendor 
prove that interoperability between the installed 
environment and their Internet Infrastructure is 
reliable, secure, or even possible?
24.Does the supplier have credibility in claiming to be 
able to support all the relevant Internet 
Infrastructure services that your company expects 
to use?    Does the vendor have the consulting 
expertise to bring information on best practices 
from other implementations to bear on your 
business problems and opportunities? 
26
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Five
Supplier Abstracts
Borland International Inc.
100 Borland Way
Scotts Valley, CA 95066
(408) 431-1000
www.borland.com
Market Position
Effective in June 1998, Borland International Inc. will change its 
name to Inprise, Inc. to forge a new identity for itself.    Inprise will 
focus heavily on the middleware market, using technologies from 
several recent acquisitions.    Borland (Inprise) produces solid 
technology that is much admired and touted by developers, but -- 
unlike Microsoft -- has a hard time getting credibility in the 
enterprise. Inprise’s JBuilder Java compiler is well regarded and 
was recently licensed by Oracle for use as the cornerstone of its 
own Java efforts.
Since Borland had difficulty positioning itself as anything but a 
tools supplier, it felt that the name change, in conjunction with the 
acquisition of Visigenic, would help it establish a defensible 
position in the Internet Object Computing marketplace.    
Technically, this appears feasible.    Visigenic is a widely adopted, 
although not particularly profitable, Object Request Broker 
adopted by such leading vendors as Netscape, Sun, IBM, and 
Oracle.    Combined with its leading edge Java development and 
runtime environment, JBuilder, Inprise appears to have a good 
start.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Inprise delivers excellent technology, but continues to struggle in 
its efforts to find a consistent message and marketing strategy.    
Inprise has many strategic relationships, especially through the 
Visigenic offering.    So far, however, the company has been unable 
to leverage these relationships into any lasting market position.    
27
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Inpise has the technical resources in place, it must now find the 
marketing and partnering expertise needed to leverage this 
technology into a lasting market position, or it will once again 
begin to slip away.
Hewlett-Packard Company
19111 Pruneridge Avenue
Cupertino, CA.    95014
(800) 637-7740
www.hp.com
Market Position
HP’s new Domain FoundationTools and FoundationWare offer a broad 
array of Internet Infrastructure services that offer a alternative to 
IBM, Sun, and Microsoft.    HP’s offering includes middleware, 
standards, protocols, APIs, object-technology support, and other 
components that allow Internet applications to communicate and 
execute more efficiently.    More-over, HP’s product suite is an 
extensible environment into which third-party tools can be integrated. 
And HP, through its excellent partnering programs, has earned a 
reputation as a “honest broker” that can communicate between the 
opposing camps of Microsoft and Sun/IBM Internet Infrastructures.    
Unfortunately, this partner-oriented focus has also given HP a 
reputation for never taking a technology lead, and never being first to 
market. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Aberdeen anticipates that Internet Infrastructure offerings such as HP 
Domain FoundationTools and FoundationWare should have particular 
appeal to large-enterprise decision makers, since it especially 
encourages development on scalable 3- and n-tier architectures.    HP’s 
challenge over the next 1-2 years will be to gain mindshare from 
present Internet Infrastructure heavyweights such as IBM and to 
strengthen all parts of its offering for enterprise use, particularly the 
scalability of its middleware, and differentiate its adoption of 
Netscape’s LDAP engine as the glue that can link companies together 
in a safe, managed, way. 
IBM Corporation
28
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Route 100
Somers, NY 10589
(914) 766-1800
www.ibm.com
Market Position
IBM, perhaps more than any industry player, has committed a large 
portion of its resources to Java in order to unify its huge and 
diversified installed base and product offerings. IBM believes Java 
will create a unique synergy between its multiple hardware and 
systems software platforms, enabling the company to leverage its 
tremendous assets in ISV partners, systems integration capabilities, 
and enterprise-class applications expertise.
In addition to providing Java Virtual Machines (JVMs) across all its 
platforms, IBM has also introduced the Network Computing (NC) 
Framework, the company's embodiment of the IOC platform. A key 
differentiator of the NC Framework is the close integration with 
IBM's current environment, including CICS, Notes, and MQ Series, 
while maintaining adherence to IOC's open standards.    IBM has 
also incorporated the Java language and the NC Framework into its 
VisualAge enterprise-class development environment.    The 
advantage of VisualAge's support of Java is that once an application 
is developed, it can be deployed on virtually any major platform 
while benefiting from integration with the customer's existing 
server applications.
IBM is also investing in the expansion of the Java environment by 
providing Sun's JavaSoft with access to the multi-lingual 
technologies developed by its Taligent division.    JavaSoft is also 
taking advantage of JavaBeans communication capabilities by 
working with InfoBus from IBM/Lotus.    Lotus is incorporating all 
of the above technologies into its e-Suite.
Finally, there is San Francisco.    Under this initiative for its ISVs, 
IBM is building reusable application components that provide 
generic business functionality (such as interest calculation) as well 
as standardized definitions of basic business entities (such as 
"customer" or "purchase order"). This in turn creates a framework 
so that IBM's ISVs can integrate their own best-of-breed 
applications in a seamless, enterprise-wide environment.
Aberdeen Conclusions
IBM is presenting an exceptionally attractive solution in the 
Internet Infrastructure space, with popular offerings across all 
29
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
core Internet Infrastructure components, a clear vision, and 
mindshare in E-commerce.    IBM’s major challenges over the next 
1-2 years will be to fully integrate their disparate offerings, to 
provide more interoperability with other Internet Infrastructure 
suppliers’ offerings, and to demonstrate their ability to implement 
enterprise-scale distributed applications using their Infrastructure.
30
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052-6399
(425) 882-8080
www.microsoft.com
Market Position
Microsoft is well positioned to move into enterprise environments, 
with their middleware suite and interoperability story that 
includes Microsoft Transaction Server (MTS), Microsoft Message Q 
(MSMQ) and Web services.    Moreover, Microsoft is highly popular 
among a large segment of the developer community, with such 
Internet development tools as Visual Studio, and Active Server 
Pages (ASPs) that enable developers to combine HTML with 
VBScript or JavaScript to build presentation interfaces, implement 
business logic, and call components based on Microsoft's COM.
However, Microsoft's Windows DNA (Distributed iNternet 
Architecture) Internet Infrastructure strategy is not made for inter-
enterprise computing.    Because it is so closely tied to the NT 
operating system, it lacks the scalability and platform 
independence needed for today's large-scale systems.    And a 
Microsoft-only strategy will ensure that corporate IS will miss out 
on the benefits delivered by IBM, Netscape, Sun and Oracle.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Microsoft will continue in a strong position in Internet 
Infrastructure below the enterprise level in the next 1-2 years.    
Microsoft’s challenges are (1) to deliver better scalability and 
robustness in the Internet Infrastructure products, and (2) to match 
the Java-technology and extra-enterprise capabilities of its 
competitors.
A key area to watch will be Microsoft’s delivery (or slippage) of 
COM+ technology on non-Microsoft Unix platforms.    Delivery of 
production-quality code will greatly extend Microsoft’s 
interoperability story.    Microsoft also faces a hard choice:    
whether to continue to go alone or seek rapprochement with its 
rivals that would risk loss of user lock-in.    Aberdeen believes that 
Microsoft is jeopardizing its long-term enterprise IS market 
position through its current Internet Infrastructure strategy, and 
31
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
that therefore more integration with other solutions is the better 
road to follow today.
32
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Netscape Communications Corporation.
501 East Middlefield Road
Mountain View, CA 94043-4042
(408) 542-3200
www.netscape.com
Market Position
Netscape leads the market in adoption and implementation of open 
standards.    From Web servers to Certificate Servers, and from Mail 
Servers to Directory Servers, Netscape’s adoption of standards 
helps it stand alone in the market, and formed the basis for its 
developer community and rapid corporate adoption.    Indeed, the 
SuiteSpot product set from Netscape initially defined Internet 
Computing, and has forced the rest of the computer industry to 
adapt.    However, Netscape was too slow to recognize the impact of 
Java on server-side development, and underestimated how quickly 
giants like Microsoft and IBM could react to the market challenge 
Netscape represented.    As a result, Netscape identified the new 
market opportunity, and while gaining significant ground, 
eventually lost market momentum — until now.
Netscape has now announced that it will focus its energies on the 
implementation and publication of Internet Object Computing 
Business Services.    This strategy has three components: NetCenter, 
Corporate Software, and Network Provider Software.    Netscape 
will deliver its software products to both major corporations and to 
Network Providers, in an effort to make Netscape the premier 
provider of software that enables the Service Middleware solution 
(figure 2).    Netscape will also aggressively position it’s NetCenter 
Web site as the primary portal where Businesses and Professionals 
can subscribe to Internet-based value added services.    For 
example, a company looking to outsource its Employee Benefits 
program could find companies that offer this service by visiting 
Netscape’s NetCenter Web Site. 
The challenge for Netscape is to regain its momentum.    While 
NetCenter will play a role, the more critical immediate need is find 
renewed differentiation for its SuiteSpot portfolio of Internet 
Servers and the Netscape ONE development environment.    These 
cross-platform solutions provides native support for HTML and 
Java, and provide access to multiple software services, including 
CICS, SMTP, LDAP and SQL.    Java applications written with 
33
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Netscape ONE can take full advantage of the sophisticated services 
contained in SuiteSpot.
Aberdeen Conclusion
As the Netscape product and business model evolved to resemble 
IBM’s,    it became difficult for Netscape to differentiate itself, and it 
had trouble matching the broad offerings and service/support of 
IBM.    Netscape has now announced a powerful new vision.    The 
company must now implement this vision through both its 
products and NetCenter initiative, in order to rally wide support of 
third-party solutions providers, and to again differentiate its 
products.
Novell, Inc.
1555 N. Technology Way
Orem, UT 84097
801-429-7000
www.novell.com
Market Position
IntranetWare is maintaining Novell’s long dominance of the 
Network Operating System market, and is used as the key 
component of the enterprise-wide network infrastructure and its 
link to the outside world via the Internet and Extranet.    Novell can 
therefore combine Intranetware, Novell NetWare (and especially 
its DNS directory service), and outside components such as 
Microsoft NT to create a useful Internet Infrastructure for its 
NetWare installed base.    Under the leadership of Eric Schmidt, 
Novell has planned a set of products and services for the Novell 
installed base that will leverage Java and the Internet 
Infrastructure.    Novell has announced several good initiatives 
recently, now it must be seen if the company can execute on these 
plans. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Novell’s main challenge over the next 1-2 years will be to prevent 
erosion of its installed base, and establish a portfolio of 
applications that leverage the Novell environment.    By adopting 
Enterprise Java Beans as its infrastructure, Novell can claim the 
ability to execute any EJB compliant application.    Over time, this 
will provide Novell a broad set of applications, and enable current 
34
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Novell ISV’s to feel confident that further development on the 
Novell platform is warranted.    Next, Novell must demonstrate that 
its new platform is open, compliant, robust, scaleable and 
manageable — and has value above and beyond other Java 
platforms.    It must accomplish this before NT 5.0 further erodes its 
position in the market, and this is not entirely under its control.
Oracle Corporation
500 Oracle Parkway
Redwood Shores, CA    94065
Phone:    (415) 506-7000
www.oracle.com
Market Position
Oracle claims it can provide users the benefits of Internet Object 
Computing while protecting their investment in client-server-based 
applications.    This strategy is embodied in the company's Network 
Computing Architecture (NCA).    Oracle will accomplish this by 
moving all corporate data off the desktop and into the Oracle8 
environment.
Oracle's Network Computing Architecture encompasses existing 
Oracle products, such as Oracle8, Designer/2000 and 
Developer/2000, and allows user organizations to dynamically 
select the most appropriate environment for each application — 
client-server, distributed object, or the Internet. Furthermore, NCA 
enables application partitioning through its client, server and 
database server cartridges.    Java is a key component of NCA, 
because it provides the ability to deploy a single application code 
base on multiple, heterogeneous platforms.    The Designer/2000 
and Developer/2000 products plus Java tools provide development 
capabilities.    Designer/2000 includes a WebServer generator for 
creation of transactional Internet applications and allows the 
migration of existing applications to the Web with no additional 
programming. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Oracle views its support of Java as a key differentiator against 
Microsoft in the battle to win the mind share and dollars of 
corporate IS.    However, E-commerce providers report that Oracle’s 
Internet Infrastructure products are too proprietary and less useful 
than Microsoft’s in Internet implementations.    Clearly, Oracle faces 
35
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
a major challenge overcoming these perceptions and delivering an 
Internet Infrastructure that can interoperate with other suppliers’ 
offerings over the next 2 years.
Sun Microsystems Computer Company
2550 Garcia Avenue
Mountain View, CA 94043-1100
(415) 960-1300
www:sun.com
Market Position
In the tradition of “all the wood behind one arrow”, Sun is putting 
all its Internet Infrastructure efforts behind Java.    By establishing 
the JavaSoft subsidiary, Sun has a vehicle for licensing and 
distributing Java technologies and products to the industry-
creating a brand new revenue stream for the company.    Sun's 
multiple business units, including Sun Microsystems Computer 
Company, SunSoft, Sun Microelectronics and SunService, are able 
to leverage Java to create new leadership positions in their 
respective markets. 
To bring Java to as broad a market as possible, Sun has created 
JavaSoft.    Incorporating feedback from all licensees, JavaSoft 
works to continually enhance the Java language and environment 
while assuring interoperability.    Because maintaining the support 
of the licensees is so crucial, Sun has formed the JavaSoft 
subsidiary to ensure that the evolution of Java is handled in an 
independent and impartial fashion. 
SunSoft, a second licensee, has integrated Java into all of its 
solutions, including the Solaris operating system, the IIOP CORBA 
distributed object environment, and software services such as e-
mail and directory. Additionally, SunSoft's WorkShop development 
environment offers excellent drag-and drop capabilities that 
embrace the very latest Java initiatives.    SunService has enhanced 
36
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
its training, education and implementation services to provide Java 
support to its entire client base.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Sun’s Internet Infrastructure mindshare through Java is 
substantial.    However, while Sun has a Certificate Server, e-mail 
server and Directory Server, these are offered as components, not 
as an integrated solution.    While Sun has announced that it will 
focus on integrating these solutions together to meet the needs of 
ISP’s, it has so far shown little in the way of implementation on 
these promises — although Sun’s recent re-organization may help 
put more focus on this shortcoming.    Clearly Sun’s major challenge 
over the next year is to integrate its development tools, 
middleware, and Java environment into a scaleable Internet 
Infrastructure offering.
Sybase, Inc.
6475 Christie Avenue
Emeryville, CA 94608
(800) 879-2273
www.sybase.com
Market Position
The Sybase Computing Platform integrates Adaptive Server with 
the field-proven Jaguar CTS and PowerDynamo application and 
transaction servers and Enterprise CONNECT middleware; and 
Sybase adds the popular, Java-enabled Powersoft development 
tools to enable a “write once, deploy many” solution with 
exceptional scope.    As a result, IS can apply the Sybase Computing 
Platform and Powersoft tools to an especially wide array of 
application development and upgrade needs, including Internet 
development, upgrading legacy applications with new technology, 
and integrating applications together more effectively. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Sybase provides an attractive Internet Infrastructure offering, that 
is tightly integrated and highly productive.    The challenge is that 
the PowerSoft environment has been proprietary for so long, few 
know that Jaguar has opened the environment up.    In addition, 
while PowesSoft tools are well known, the market has never heard 
37
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
of Sybase middleware solutions.    Sybase must overcome its 
heritage, and use partnerships and interoperability proof-points to 
drive broader market awareness and acceptance.
38
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
7
Key Findings:
8
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
11
Key Aberdeen Findings
11
THE INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE DEFINED
15
How the Internet Infrastructure Fits into Network Services
15
Core Internet Infrastructure Components
15
Application Development Environment
15
Application Runtime Environment
16
Service Middleware
16
ISP Services
16
How a Functioning/Integrated System Works
17
The Advantages of an Integrated Solution
17
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
19
Impact of Major IT Trends
19
Supplier Success Factors
20
User Success Factors
20
SUPPLIER ABSTRACTS
23
Borland International Inc.
23
Hewlett-Packard Company
24
IBM Corporation
24
Microsoft Corporation
26
Netscape Communications Corporation.
27
39
Internet Infrastructure Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Aberdeen Conclusion
28
Novell, Inc.
28
Oracle Corporation
28
Sun Microsystems Computer Company
29
Sybase, Inc.
30
40
