Marketing Analysis &Positioning Assistance
For Business Technology Executives at -





Executive Overview
Aberdeen Group has a very straightforward mission: to identify emerging and growing technology trends, analyze how they will impact business operations, and then educate both enterprise-level IT suppliers and users with its insights.  

Aberdeen’s analysts, steeped in technology and armed with field research, work one-on-one with clients to assist in accelerating the widespread acceptance of both new technologies and the qualified suppliers that provide them as part of their product and service offerings.  Aberdeen’s market position acts as the bridge between emerging companies that have excellent messages IT professionals need to hear and between established suppliers that need to meet the changing needs of their customer base and the general market.
*****
Aberdeen employs a number of methods to amplify a client’s value proposition for both internal and external audiences.  

	Consulting Services
	Primary Market Research
	Audience Education and Training  



	Consulting Services

Aberdeen Group's consulting services can be designed to meet a client's individual project requirements. While many assignments involve a single analyst, a consulting engagement with Aberdeen Group might also provide access to multiple analysts, with expertise in a different technology segment.

Advisory Access Service  (AAS) - Retainer Program
In this turbulent business environment, strategies must often change quickly. Aberdeen's AAS offers one-on-one access to an Aberdeen analyst. Through an Advisory Access program, executives of the customer organization gain insight into Aberdeen's knowledge of technology trends, industry sales challenges and advanced marketing strategies. These retainer-based services also help supplier decision-makers develop a keen awareness of time-sensitive competitive analysis and communications programs that effectively present go-to-market value propositions. Aberdeen's AAS offers direct access to knowledgeable experts who pride themselves on responding successfully under pressure - as if the client's company were their own. Offered in all Aberdeen technology sectors, clients can customize or build on the AAS by adding consulting days, custom research or other Aberdeen services. 
Marketing Workshop 
Aberdeen marketing workshops help clients position their products and services effectively in every phase of the product life cycle. When more than one Aberdeen analyst is required or when information on new opportunities or marketing readiness is the key to development and launch success, an Aberdeen workshop can be uniquely packaged to meet the customer's specific needs. By combining the talents of its content experts from multiple Aberdeen coverage areas with senior engagement management personnel, Aberdeen is able to deliver project value quickly - even with the most complex set of project variables and the most aggressive deadlines.
Strategy Validation (RAMP)
Aberdeen's Rapid Accurate Market Positioning (RAMP) service provides in-depth analysis of the positioning outcomes of a marketing consulting assignment through a series of face-to-face interviews with key clients, prospects and industry influencers. After working with the client to develop a list of interview candidates, Aberdeen develops a questionnaire and quickly executes the fieldwork necessary to identify how customers will respond to new program initiatives versus how other, less-reliable information sources suggest they might respond. 
 
Research Reports

In addition to client-related research and consulting, Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, which are must-haves for organizations that need to quickly and judiciously gather insightful analysis and get up-to-speed about markets and suppliers. 


	Primary Market Research

Aberdeen Group generates primary qualitative and quantitative market research data on emerging technology markets.
Market Analysis Service (MAS) 
Aberdeen's MAS is an annual program that includes qualitative analysis and quantitative data on 14 high-growth technology markets combined with access to Aberdeen's industry experts. MAS focuses on emerging markets and high-growth areas of existing markets such as Customer Relationship Management and Internet Service Providers. 

Custom Research
Custom research can be undertaken to support any Aberdeen consulting engagement. The following Aberdeen's technology groups sponsor their own primary market research programs and combine this work with an Analyst Access Service. e-Business and Security


	 Audience Education and Training

In order to amplify a client's value proposition for internal and external audiences, Aberdeen offers a variety of audience education and training services after go-to-market positioning, messaging and strategy development activities are complete.
Strategy Acceleration
Aberdeen provides customized strategy acceleration services that enable sales teams to understand the most recently developed marketing programs from headquarters. Dealing with sophisticated and complex content on topics from mergers and acquisitions (M&A) to roadmaps associated with a new product launch, Aberdeen strategy acceleration services are positioned for instantaneous delivery technology of the web to synchronize and strengthen the customer's field and channel partner sales efforts. 
 
Webcasts and Speeches

Aberdeen can provide insights into market trends and supplier strategies by participating in a company-sponsored Webcast for prospects, customers and internal meetings. 

Publications

Written deliverables can be in the form of marketing collateral publications and strategic marketing materials such as Impacts, Profiles, and Executive Briefing papers.


	Aberdeen Impact

An Impact is an Aberdeen analyst’s synopsis of how a supplier’s new announcement or product introduction will affect a market and that supplier’s future prospects.  It presents Aberdeen’s bottom-line findings, succinctly stating why an IS decision-maker should be knowledgeable about your company’s action.  An Impact analyzes both the customer impact and the impact within a well-defined market segment.  Clients find Impacts highly effective for use in press kits, direct mailings, and up-to-the-minute sales collateral.

	Executive White Papers  (10 to 16 pages)

An Executive White Paper provides an interpretation and analysis of industry trends, technologies, and methodologies — with an emphasis on the business implications for end-user organizations.  An Executive White Paper describes and analyzes a key IT issue and how a specific supplier responds to it.  Aberdeen publishes an Executive White Paper when an in-depth analysis is required for a significant issue that is being vigorously debated within the industry.
Aberdeen is often requested to test and validate a marketing or technical positioning proposition believed by the sponsoring client to establish and validate a unique and compelling competitive advantage.  The client and Aberdeen agree on this positioning thesis, which will be researched and tested.  The results of Aberdeen’s research are documented in the form of an Executive White Paper.





	Aberdeen Profile(s)

	OnSite Profile  -  (Case Studies) - (8 to 10 pages)

Aberdeen is often requested to test and validate the marketing or technical positioning proposition believed by the sponsoring client to establish a unique and compelling competitive advantage.  This validation is developed by Aberdeen performing an in-depth analysis of a single customer (or, in certain instances, multiple customers) of the client with respect to that customer’s implementation of the client solution. 	

	Company Profile (8-10 pages)
 
Details and validates a company’s product and/or service offerings, technology and infrastructure from a third-party perspective.  A profile describes/evaluates the company's technology, channel relationships, and market positioning.  It is an excellent vehicle to help a company gain visibility and differentiate its business value proposition in dynamic and volatile marketplaces. 

	Strategy Profile (8-10 pages) 

Identifies the business issue a particular company/solution is attempting to resolve (and how existing solutions are addressing -- or failing to address -- this issue); evaluates the unique business model, technology, and delivery strategy the company/solution is using to resolve this issue; makes a value judgment on how this strategy/solution compares to (i.e., is better than) existing solutions

	Performance Profile  (8 to 10 pages)

Evaluates a supplier’s new product or service performance against existing or evolving industry benchmarks.

	Announcement Profile  (8 to 10 pages)

Articulates, clarifies, analyzes, or evaluates a supplier’s new (or re-launched) product or service.  Typically coinciding with the client’s product or service launch.





	Market Visibility SnapShot

A Market Visibility SnapShot is a powerful combination of offerings that provide market visibility to knowledgeable and qualified buyers, support for outbound communications and a safe forum for testing critical ideas before they are delivered to market.  A Market Visibility Snapshot is a one page document, highlighting your company and logo, hosted on Aberdeen Groups website and linked to your homepage.  In addition to visibility, clients can interface with Aberdeen analysts for press quotes and bi-annual one-hour briefings.
   

	Aberdeen Lead Generation

Aberdeen populates our website with regular, thought provoking technology and business oriented topics from each of our technology disciplines.  Each concept is well support by research and analysis, and readers are provided with an opinion - offered by the author.  

This stimulating ‘free’ research draws thousands of daily readers who, after they register, can gain access to the publication topic of interest.  This registration provides Aberdeen a stream of interested buyers.   Some may call these registrants merely suspects, but in the hands of your sales team, many of the names will turn into solid prospects.




