AberdeenGro
up
Data Knowledge:
1998 
Practice 
Summary
July 1998
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
One Boston Place
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
USA
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
www.aberdeen.com
AberdeenGroup  ii
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Aberdeen Group, founded in 1988, is a Boston-based information 
technology research and consulting organization that closely 
monitors user needs, technological innovation, and market 
developments. It focuses its research efforts on the business impact 
of technology changes.
Aberdeen Practice Summaries present concise overviews of the 
most significant issues and trends in each of the Aberdeen Practices. 
Aberdeen currently offers Practice Summaries in the following 
topics: 
Vertical Industries
Network Services
Healthcare
Application Development
Retail
Strategic Data Management
Utilities
Internet Infrastructures
Information Security
Professional Services
Middleware 
Electronic Commerce 
Network Operating Systems
Enterprise Resource Planning 
Systems & Network Management
NT Implementation
Networking & 
Telecommunications
Year 2000
Networking
Professional Services
Computer Telephony Integration
Tools
Telecommunications Hardware
Managed Carrier Services
Systems Platforms & 
Architectures
Enterprise Business 
Applications
Business Desktops
Customer Interaction Software
Network Computing
Enterprise Resource Planning
NT Servers
Electronic Commerce
Storage & Storage Management
Knowledge Management
Workstations
Enterprise Application 
Performance
AberdeenGroup iii
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Information contained in this publication has been obtained from sources we believe to be 
reliable, but is not warranted by us.  Opinions reflect judgment at the time and are subject 
to change without notice.
The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations mentioned in this 
publication are the property of their respective holders.
Warning:  This publication is protected by United States copyright law and international 
treaties.  Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this publication are copyrighted by 
Aberdeen Group, Inc., and may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means without prior written consent.  Unauthorized 
reproduction or distribution of this publication, or any portion of it, may result in severe 
civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the maximum extent necessary to 
protect the rights of the publisher. 
© 1998 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
AberdeenGroup  iv
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Table of Contents
Data Knowledge Practice Summary............................
Strategic Market Questions.........................................
Executive Summary......................................................
Summary of Findings....................................................
Key Aberdeen Findings.....................................................
Data Knowledge Defined..............................................
How Data Knowledge Fits into EBA...............................
Data Knowledge Components.........................................
Impact of Major IT Trends...............................................
Supplier Success Factors...................................................
Refining the analytical environment so that it is 
tuned to rapidly capturing on the changing data.....
User Success Factors...........................................................
Supplier Abstracts.........................................................
Arbor Software Corp..........................................................
Business Objects..................................................................
Cognos.....................................................................................
Compaq...................................................................................
IBM Corporation..................................................................
Information Advantage Inc..............................................
Informix Software Corp. (MetaCube)............................
MicroStrategy Inc................................................................
Naviant Technology Solutions.........................................
NCR Corporation..................................................................
Oracle Corp............................................................................
Platinum technology inc...................................................
SAS Institute Inc...................................................................
Other Suppliers..............................................................
Aberdeen Group Retainer Services...............................
AberdeenGroup v
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Preface
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Focus: 
As one of the pillars in Aberdeen’s Enterprise Business Applications 
(EBA) research area, the Data Knowledge and Complex Decision 
Support practice has two primary concerns, each informing, 
influencing, and evolving with the other. 
From a Data Knowledge perspective, this practice is concerned with 
the organization of data so that it can become the basis for 
measuring and improving operational effectiveness.  Aberdeen 
believes that Data Knowledge should be viewed as the operational 
basis for the evolution of the enterprise through management’s 
creative focus on methodically analyzing the enterprise’s 
effectiveness in recognizing trends and relationships that can be 
acted upon to meet emerging customer desires and manage 
continuous improvements in operational processes. 
Against this backdrop, the Data Knowledge and Complex Decision 
Support practice offers a holistic view of information access, with 
particular attention to systematic use of core DSS technologies — 
data warehousing, data marts, Web-based query/reporting/analysis 
software, various types of on-line analytical processing (OLAP), 
campaign management software, data transformation tools, 
metadata, visualization software, and data mining.  In addition to 
exploring the buy-versus-build quandaries that face enterprises at 
every point during the process of decision-enabling the enterprise, 
Aberdeen research indicates that these technologies must be held 
together by guiding principles that reflect end-user and enterprise 
current and future needs.  This guiding principle, again, is Data 
Knowledge.
With this philosophy and perspective on the core DSS technologies, 
this practice works closely with other Aberdeen specialists in 
identifying the value of combining data knowledge and DSS with 
other enterprise business applications, including Customer 
Interaction Software (CIS), Enterprise Resource Processing (ERP), and 
Electronic Commerce, as well as the implementation of these 
AberdeenGroup  vi
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
combined technologies in vertical industries.  In addition to the goal 
of increased operational effectiveness, this practice helps enterprises 
speed up the planning, installation, and ROI of their evolving 
information-access architectures as well as understand and manage 
customer relationships, target market, retain customers, and identify 
risk.
Strategic Market Questions 
1. How is integration of decision support tools from a vertical-
industry perspective redefining best practices among DSS 
suppliers as well as for end users?
2. Where have data mining tools delivered vertical, industry-specific 
knowledge?
3. What suppliers offer — and what is the value of — ready-made 
vertical industry warehouses, data marts, and underlying tools?
4. How do I give the enterprise a lens into its current EBA systems 
(i.e. ERP, CIS, SFA)?
5. Where can end users find — and how can they leverage — true 
customer relationship marketing software?
6. What points of comparison can enterprise planners use to 
effectively evaluate the best data mining tools or combination of 
data mining tools to help the enterprise achieve its objectives? 
AberdeenGroup vii
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Chapter One
Executive Summary
Data Knowledge is concerned with the organization of data so that it 
can become the basis for measuring and improving operational 
effectiveness.  Aberdeen believes that Data Knowledge can be viewed 
as the operational basis for the evolution of the enterprise through 
management’s creative focus on methodically analyzing the 
enterprise’s effectiveness in recognizing trends and relationships 
that can be acted upon to meet emerging customer desires and 
manage continuous improvements in operational processes. 
User organizations continue to benefit significantly by systematically 
applying core DSS technologies, which support Data Knowledge 
endeavors, against real-world business problems.  Among the core 
technologies explained in this Summary Report are data 
warehousing; data marts; query/reporting/ analysis software in 
client-server and Web-based configurations; various types of on-line 
analytical processing (OLAP), Customer Relationship Management 
software, and data mining.  These technologies, where appropriate, 
can become the lens through which business users of different job 
functions and different skill levels peer into the operations — past, 
present, and future — of the user organization. 
But not every technology is appropriate for every task and for every 
user.  As a lens, moreover, these technologies today are either too 
cloudy or too narrowly focused.  They just don’t let you see enough.  
And specialists — at great expense in terms of time and money — 
typically have to prepare each view.  This is particularly true of Data 
Knowledge technologies as they are tied to Customer Interaction 
Software (CIS), Electronic Commerce (EC), and Enterprise Resource 
Processing applications. 
These three core business applications — CIS, EC, and ERP— contain 
the pulse of the enterprise.  They are the keys to understanding 
operational effectiveness and efficiency; the pleasure and 
disapproval of customers; as well as the deep relationships between, 
for example, processes, goods, and financing throughout the supply 
AberdeenGroup 1
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
chain.  Yet the best most enterprises have been able to do is either 
take a snap shot (via query and reporting, for example) of what has 
been going on in the operational system; or pull some information 
out, reorganize it, put it in another place (typically a data warehouse 
or data mart), and try to examine the information in an historical 
context. 
But DSS technologies are now undergoing change.  The executive eye 
is on promising advancements in replacing the batch interfaces 
between analytical environments and their data sources with real-
time interfaces.  In the context of CIS, EC, and ERP, suppliers will 
have to deliver solutions that not only meet real-time challenges, but 
that are also vertically focused and designed to deliver, for example, 
performance indicators with content and in a form that is 
appropriate for different users, form the chief executive and a 
business analyst. 
The Worldwide Web, as another major influence, is pushing 
information to new user communities.  These users, in turn, are 
asking more of Data Knowledge.  In particular, users want 
meaningful informational access in as close as possible to real-time.  
Moreover, bottom-line-oriented executives want tools that have been 
tuned to the requirements of specific industries.  These executives 
want suppliers, wherever possible, to shoulder the burden of tying 
together whatever component parts constitute a finished solution.  It 
is this complete solution that consultants and integrators can stitch 
into the enterprise.  In other words, executives are wary of 
“solutions” that take longer to build than it would to construct the 
building that will house the solutions.
Thus, executives view quick-install (measured in weeks) data marts 
as a more favorable to data warehouses, as well as to the style of 
data mart that may take from three to six months to install.  At the 
same time, the data warehouse is beginning to return its initial role 
as a cross-corporate analytical environment that will serve the needs 
of the corporation through the relatively few specialists who will 
have access to it.  For data warehouses that are at the hub of a 
specific vertical-industry application, many user organizations want 
to purchase a warehouse with as much pre-built functionality as 
possible. 
AberdeenGroup  2
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
This is true for the newly emerging Customer Relationship 
Management systems, which leverage data warehouses with 
software that is designed to locate high-pay back customers, drive 
promotions and other loyalty-stimulating programs at the customer, 
and keep track of the progress, success, and failure of the program.  
The major shortcoming to these systems to data is that most 
suppliers have not been forthcoming about the process 
reengineering that such systems require, nor have the suppliers for 
the most part shown awareness that these systems must be linked to 
customer-facing applications such as Sales Force Automation (SFA).
Equally important, organizations with data warehouses are now 
beginning to understand that the data warehouse is a highly 
effective means as a “factory” for organizing information in 
preparation to send it to highly refined data marts.  In this 
configuration, the warehouse is not designed for analysis but for 
producing and disseminating data that has been “groomed” for use 
elsewhere.  The goal is to have common metrics for the data marts, 
as well as to eliminate redundant data feeds, and to help 
departments to use “non-standard” multidimensional databases in 
the relational world.
Numerous changes in underlying Data Knowledge technologies will 
promote new thinking and applications in which Data Knowledge 
and its technologies are a driving force.  This Summary Report is 
intended to highlight some of these changes and locate where Data 
Knowledge technologies can be used.  Moreover, this Summary 
Report is intended for two primary audiences: line-of-business (LOB) 
and Information Systems (IS) executives who are responsible for 
finding ways to increase operational efficiencies and effectiveness; 
and the Data Knowledge suppliers that will serve the critical role of 
delivering the technologies and applications that will be critical to 
the success of their customers.
AberdeenGroup 3
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Chapter Two
Summary of Findings
The fervor for Data Knowledge applications and technologies among 
user organizations continues to increase as line-of-business and IT 
departments of all sizes add various styles and elements of decision 
support technologies into their information-access arsenals.  Data 
warehouse-related technologies should continue their annual 
growth rate from approximately $5.2 billion in 1996 to $20.6 billion 
in 1999. This projection is for decision-support tools of all styles, 
hardware, software, (including servers and databases) and systems-
integration consulting.  Aberdeen estimates that the market for 
decision support tools alone should jump from its current $1 billion 
to about $ 2.5 billion in 1999.  But the market is changing. 
Sophisticated Global 1000 organizations have spent the past few 
years laying a Data Knowledge foundation or infrastructure via data 
warehousing, and they are now looking for applications that 
leverage that monumental labor.  Since many other user 
organizations are searching for more-tactical solutions to their 
pressing information-access problems, Aberdeen anticipates that 
newly refined Online-Analytical Processing (OLAP) tools — including 
query/reporting analysis software, high-end multidimensional 
servers, and quick build data marts — will likely enjoy a stimulated 
market.  However, suppliers will also frequently deliver these 
individual technologies as part of complete solutions, either married 
to an applications such as Customer Interaction Software (CIS) or 
Enterprise Resource Processing (ERP), or at least be prepared to 
facilitate a future integration effort.
Key Aberdeen Findings

The core Data Knowledge technologies are primarily developed 
and marketed by individual suppliers.  For example, 
query/reporting/analysis software is typically a single-supplier 
technology.  However, Data Knowledge applications or 
environments (e.g., data warehouse) can be comprised of 
multiple technologies.  The suppliers with the widest channels 
— typically hardware, Relational Database Management 
AberdeenGroup  4
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
System(RDBMS) suppliers, and systems integrators — bring 
together the multiple piece parts and assemble them for the 
user organization.

Few Data Knowledge implementations are done without 
consulting.  The degree of consulting ranges from full planning 
and implementations to training.  More complex Data 
Knowledge environments, for example, Customer Relationship 
Management, require a considerable amount of professional 
services, representing as much as sixty percent of contract. 
However, most implementations of Data Knowledge are at the 
very least refined by internal IS or LOB technologists.

The Data Knowledge tools have met with mixed success.  Data 
warehouses take too long to build, data marts don’t reach 
enough users, Query/Reporting/Analysis tools require 
significant preparation, and data mining systems are about 75% 
data preparation.  In other words, the tools are still too difficult 
to use. 

The biggest constraint with Data Knowledge is that it is applied 
on data that is far removed from the business logic and the 
processes.  Data knowledge tools, for the most part, analyze 
some form of summary information in an off-line fashion.  
Most of the tools, moreover, are based on some form of data 
duplication.  Moreover, these tools are generally batch oriented, 
although real-time decision support is slowly emerging.  
Nevertheless, end user organizations have attested to strong 
returns on investment from current tools.

Although the Data Knowledge technologies are numerous, there 
are generally only two or three architectural approaches to 
each type of tool (e.g. query and reporting) or environment.  
Refer to Chapter Three for explanations of these technologies. 

Data warehouses are cross-enterprise in scope.  They are 
typically designed to allow specialists to analyze the data 
warehouse directly, and to feed down-stream data marts.  
The alternative is to build a warehouse that is designed for 
the purpose of feeding “down-stream” data marts, but not 
for direct analysis. 

Data marts can be used as standalone systems 
(independent) or linked to a warehouse (dependent).  
When independent data marts multiply, they can increase 
AberdeenGroup 5
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
overhead on the operational systems and create redundant 
data feeds, and cause inconsistencies 

Relational OLAP (ROLAP) has two primary architectures.  
Although these environments all allow the user 
organizations to explore hundreds of gigabytes of data 
across numerous dimensions, they are all slow compared 
to the typical speed of a multidimensional database. 

Multidimensional databases come in many different forms, 
but are generally very effective for applications that 
demand forecasting, analysis, planning, budgeting, and 
financial analysis.  Part of their difficulty is that skills in 
one architecture are not easily transferable. of current 
MDBs. 

Query/Reporting/Analysis software is typically composed of 
a full desktop for analysts and browser-server 
configurations for the largest majority of users.  The Query, 
Reporting, and analysis features of these facilities can be 
part of a single base-line architecture, or can be comprised 
of modules that work seamlessly together. 

Data mining software in this report refers to high-end 
systems, not the desktop variety.  High-end systems vary 
depending upon the algorithms that are used, the 
applications in which they are applied, and how well they 
are married to other tools, including the data warehouse 
and query and reporting. 

Customer Relationship Management systems are part data 
warehouse, part data mining, and part campaign 
management software.  High-end systems are typically 
built on a backbone of an RDBMS and parallel-scalable 
processors, but enterprises can also choose among desktop 
tools, service bureaus, and emerging systems that leverage 
the high-end chores with intelligent software components 
that can seek populations of customers without require the 
brute force of back-end systems. 

Integrating Data Knowledge into Customer Interaction 
Software, Electronic Commerce, and Enterprise Resource 
Planning is now at a very early stage.  Most forms of 
integration lack depth, especially in a vertical industry 
context, and require user organizations or systems 
AberdeenGroup  6
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
integrators to transform and move data from the 
application to a separate analytical environment. 

ISVs have typically relied on a combination of direct sales and 
partnership-alliances.  Professional services firms have proved 
particularly loyal to ISVs, once the software supplier has 
successfully pulled the professional services firm into a sale.  
And partnership strategies are also evolving.  In some 
instances, ISV’s and professional services firms are realizing 
that end-user organizations need tools that are linked far more 
deeply than applications programming interfaces (APIs) 
typically provide.  These ISV and professional service partners 
are advancing integration at a process level.

Data Knowledge suppliers are now beginning to consolidate, with 
acquisitions becoming more common, and single suppliers 
emerging with a full set of technologies.  Moreover, Aberdeen 
believes that Microsoft’s aggressive entrance into the OLAP 
market with the delivery of Plato OLAP tool will increase the 
trend toward consolidations.  Although many start-ups are 
emerging, many of these technologies are insufficiently 
differentiated from the technologies of successful, predominate 
suppliers.  Unless truly differentiated, start-ups can expect to be 
fall on the road to the IPO or to be acquired by predominate 
suppliers.

The principal buyer is obviously different depending on the 
technology, its costs, where it will be used, and the effect on the 
overall corporation.  The line-of-business or IS division may 
purchase a multidimensional database, query and reporting 
tools, and data marts.  Big ticket items such as CRM systems and 
data warehouses affect the entire user organization; these 
systems are increasingly purchased by the Chief Financial 
Officer.

Data Knowledge shoppers, need to examine multiple issues, 
including the financial health of the supplier, the application of 
the Data Knowledge technology to the specific-vertical industry, 
the inherent security of technology, the tool’s extensibility, and 
the ability of the supplier to support the software.  There is also 
the requirement that the software can be used, where 
appropriate, by the broadest user populations, and that the tool 
has the administrative facilities to allow the user organization 
to easily meet that challenge.  Moreover, true Data Knowledge, 
particularly as it relates to applications such as CIS and ERP, is 
AberdeenGroup 7
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
beginning to be examined in the context of integration to these 
applications.

Different Data Knowledge elements are evaluated according to 
different criteria.  Top suppliers in the Query/Reporting/Analysis 
sector perform the rituals of release by release “leap-froging,” 
aware that technological differentiation is difficult to maintain 
and that the buying decision comes down to the “feel of the 
tool,” ease of use, and ease of administration.  Alliances with 
suppliers of other Data Knowledge tools are another key factor, 
increasing the chances that the end-user organizations may 
already have the partner’s tool installed, thus increasing the 
user organization’s receptivity. 

Higher-end technologies, such as data warehouses and CRM 
systems, are differentiated by the reputation of the 
hardware/RDBMS supplier, and core competency of the supplier 
in the particular vertical industry. 

Multidimensional technologies are differentiated by their ability 
to allow users to write to the database, the size of the database, 
and the number of dimensions.  User organizations factor how 
long it takes to model, load, and refresh the database and 
measure those factors against applications demands. 

The data warehouse, CRM, and ROLAP, because of their 
complexity, are generally installed or being installed in the 
Global 1000. 

Data warehouses can take well over a year to implement and 
generally require the user organization to follow a formal 
methodology that includes interviewing users, planning, 
database selection, data base modeling steps.  A pre-built 
warehouse, which is pointed at a specific vertical industry, 
typically includes a business and data model, as well as a 
variety of pre-built analytical applications mapped to that 
model. 

Data mart implementations typically take between two weeks 
and six months, depending on the type of tool and it application. 
User organizations typically follow many of the processes in a 
data warehouse methodology (obviously pointed at a single 
subject area).  For some data marts, user organizations turn to 
facilities that are particularly strong at automating many of the 
steps involved in transforming and migrating data from 
operational systems into data marts. 

For query/reporting/ analysis software, implementations can be 
measured in weeks, with implementers using drag and drop 
AberdeenGroup  8
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
procedures to prepare the environments for different 
populations of users. 

User organizations implementing ROLAP and CRM Systems take 
steps similar to those performed in data warehousing.  ROLAP 
implementations, assuming the existence of a warehouse in the 
organization generally requires a few months.  CRM systems 
require about six to nine months for implementation.  Data 
mining implementations require from one to six months, 
depending on the amount of data, its condition, and the power 
of the data mining algorithms.  Implementing data mining is 
about 75 percent data preparation. 

Implementing a Data Knowledge tool with either CIS or ERP 
generally requires about the same time as it does when a tool is 
applied to any other source.  Suppliers have developed 
templates that guide user organizations through (and speed up) 
the integration process. 

A few technical innovations are enabling Data Knowledge 
technologies — particularly query/ reporting/analysis tools, 
multidimensional databases, and data marts — to reach mid-
sized organizations.  The Web is one driving force, reducing 
both the cost and the difficulty of reaching broader user 
populations.  Similarly, the Web has has increased the number 
of seats suppliers are able to establish in their installed bases.  
Many suppliers are using the Java programming language to 
build programs that can be embedded in HTML pages and 
bring interactive features to the Web. 

Microsoft has substantially shifted supplier behavior in the Data 
Knowledge arena.  NT is now considered a data mart platform-
of-choice.  Many suppliers that formerly tuned their databases 
solely to Unix-based systems, including parallel-scalable 
processor architectures, have refined them for NT.  Merchant 
RDBMS suppliers have also tuned their systems for NT.  NT has 
driven down data mart prices, and it has changed the go-to-
market strategies and channels of most suppliers.

Moreover, Microsoft’s Plato, a decision-support technology the 
company acquired from Israel-based Panorama Software and 
that Microsoft is now beta testing, has been a catalyst to many 
changes in the decision support market, even before its planned 
shipment later this year.  Many suppliers have publicly 
embraced Plato, and have or plan to partner with Microsoft, 
although officials of these partners say they are not quite sure 
what Plato is. 
AberdeenGroup 9
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 

Data warehouse typically cost between $1 million and $1.5 
million, while data marts can cost between about $50,000 and 
$400,000, depending on the type of data mart.  
Query/Reporting/analysis tools generally cost about $50,000 for 
the Web server versions; various components, such as 
administrative facilities and full-client versions of the software 
cost approximately $1,500 each.  Multidimensional servers cost 
about $40,000.  Most high-end data mining environments cost 
between $250,000 and $400,000.  CRM systems range from 
$200,000 to $2.5 million depending on size, and on what pieces, 
for example, a data warehouse, already have been installed.  
Low-end ROLAP systems start at about $60,000 while the higher 
end systems can reach as much as $300,000. 
AberdeenGroup  10
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Chapter 
Three
Data Knowledge Defined
How Data Knowledge Fits into EBA
Data Knowledge is concerned with the organization of data so that it 
can become the basis for measuring and improving operational 
effectiveness.  Aberdeen believes that Data Knowledge can be viewed 
as the operational basis for the evolution of the enterprise through 
management’s creative focus on methodically analyzing the 
enterprise’s effectiveness in recognizing trends and relationships 
that can be acted upon to meet emerging customer desires and 
manage continuous improvements in operational processes. 
Enterprises benefit significantly by viewing information access 
holistically, with particular attention to systematic use of core DSS 
technologies — data warehousing; data marts; query/reporting/ 
analysis software in client-server and Web-based configurations, 
various types of on-line analytical processing (OLAP), customer 
Relationship Management software, and data mining. Refer to Figure 
1, below.
Figure 1: The Enterprise Business Applications Universe
AberdeenGroup 11
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
E-Commerce
EDI
CIS
SFA
Service
CTI
HRMS
MFG & 
DIST
MRO
APO
FIN
ERP
EFT
Internet
Data Knowledge
OLAP
Data
Warehouse
Data
Mining
 
Source: AberdeenGroup, May 1998
With this philosophy and perspective on the core DSS technologies, 
enterprises can identify the value of combining Data Knowledge 
with other Enterprise Business Applications (EBA), including 
Customer Interaction Software (CIS), and Electronic Commerce (EC), 
and Enterprise Resource Processing (ERP), as well as the 
implementation of these combined technologies in vertical 
industries. 
Data Knowledge Components
Data Knowledge is made up of multiple decision support (DSS) and 
DSS-related technologies, which user organizations and IT suppliers 
apply in various ways to deliver a systematic method for gathering 
knowledge from data. (Refer to the Data Knowledge Universe, Figure 
2, for a partial view of data knowledge.)  Enterprises apply these 
technologies with the principle goal of guiding the organization into 
competitive advantage via a better understanding of markets, 
customers, and internal processes.
To ease the burden on the reader, Aberdeen has chosen to discuss 
these technologies in the context of their applications.  For example, 
data warehousing, as will be discussed below, is comprised of 
numerous technologies, which are utilized from an application 
perspective.  A thorough discussion of the intricacies of, and the 
relationship between, all of these components — for example 
AberdeenGroup  12
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
relational database management systems (RDBMSs) and parallel-
scalable processors within a data warehouse — is not the goal of this 
Practice Summary.  More to the point is the attempt to position the 
applicability of data warehousing from a Data Knowledge 
perspective and to suggest to the reader what to anticipate when 
trying to implement data warehousing facilities. 
Data Warehouse
Aberdeen defines a data warehouse as a database derived from one 
or more internal databases and specifically designed to supply 
business analysts (as well as some other end-users) with an 
environment that represents the corporate-level subject areas and 
that supports decision support queries.  One of the primary purposes 
of a data warehouse is to off load the query burden from operational 
systems. 
How A Functioning Data Warehouse Works
Implicit in Aberdeen’s definition is the recognition that a warehouse 
holds data that has been downloaded and filtered from various 
operational systems within the enterprise, including third-party 
applications such as ERP and CIS.  Moreover, since data will change 
over time, the warehouse typically contains facilities — whether 
from a third-party supplier or built in house — that help manage 
meta data (or data about data) that can serve as a map of the content 
within the warehouse. 
Meta data functions include helping technologists and users 
understand how data arrived in warehouse, where it came from, 
how it was transformed. 
For the purposes of differentiating a data warehouse from a data 
mart, which will be discussed in a subsequent section, it is important 
for enterprises to remember that a data warehouses typically reflects 
a model of the entire corporation’s data, in contrast to the generally 
departmental nature of the data mart.  Data warehouses combine 
considerable amounts of detail data as well as summary data; and 
data volumes tend to be large.  Data warehouses generally include 
substantial amounts of historical data, thus preparing them for 
business analyst queries.  Although data warehouses are 
AberdeenGroup 13
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
comprehensive in scope, they are built iteratively.  After completing 
one subject, say sales and marketing, the enterprise moves on to 
another subject such as finance.
Building the data warehouse has proven to be a mammoth effort; 
they generally cost over a $1 million and more than a year to 
implement.  These systems typically require the twin powers of 
RDBMSs and scaleable-parallel processors — including symmetric 
multiprocessing, and variations using Non-Uniform Memory Access 
(NUMA) techniques.  Enterprises either use merchant databases (i.e., 
Informix, Oracle, or Sybase) in combination with these types of 
hardware, or turn to more targeted database and hardware 
combinations from specialized suppliers.  RDBMS-processor 
combinations, which have been tuned over time to work together,  
enable enterprises to scale up and speed up performance as more 
users come online, or as these users ask more complex, resource-
intensive questions.
The Advantages Of Integrated Warehousing
Integrated data warehouse packages, which are aimed at specific 
industries, health care and insurance for example, have trimmed the 
data warehouse implementation cycle by as much as half.  These 
“packaged” warehouses generally contain robust data models; 
RDBMS schemas that apply the models; data transformation tools, 
which programmatically gather data from legacy systems, enhance 
it, and move it to the warehouse; and combinations of structured 
analytical applications and ad hoc analytical environments.  
However, the suppliers of these focused, pre-configured solutions 
have not driven down prices; rather, suppliers typically charge a 
premium for enabling enterprises to become data warehousers 
quickly. 
Most data warehouse offerings, however, are not integrated in the 
sense of a packaged application, although suppliers over time have 
refined the technologies discussed in the previous paragraph to work 
better together.  Various query tools, for example, can read the meta 
data facilities of transformation environments, and hardware 
suppliers have tuned their hardware more tightly with the RDBMSs, 
which are used as the storage mechanisms for the warehouse.
AberdeenGroup  14
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Figure 2: The Data Knowledge Universe
CIS
ERP
EC
VSAM  ISAM
Operational Systems
   Data Warehouse
Query/Reporting/Analysis via Browsers and Desktop
End Users/Analysts/Executives/Info.Consumers
Data is typically
repetitively
(denormalized)
stored in the
warehouse for
direct access by
tools
Prepares
and
optimizes
data for
single-
subject area
analysis by
access tools
Data Marts
MDB/ROLAP/
Hybrid OLAP
Analysis
via direct
access by
tools
Corporate view of data
for either direct tool
access or to feed data
marts
Source:AberdeenGroup, June 1998
(can be normalized or organized, for
example, via  ROLAP)
Transformation Environment
AberdeenGroup 15
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Data Marts
There are vast differences between data warehouses and data marts. 
Although data marts are frequently described in industry shorthand 
as much smaller and less expensive forms of a data warehouse, this 
is often misleading.  Data marts and data warehouses are more 
different than alike.  These departmental databases, as opposed to 
enterprise databases, are optimized for the "domains" they serve, 
typically reflect a single-subject (e.g. finance), and need to satisfy the 
demands of business users, not necessarily business analysts.
How Data Marts Work
These information repositories are housed on three primary 
technologies: RDBMSs, multidimensional databases (MDBs), or a 
hybrid of the two.  RDBMS-driven systems are typically built on a 
star schema — a dimensional modeling technique that creates 
multidimensional views of the database contents.  The star schema 
design may contain a fact table comprised, for example, of sales 
information such as gross revenue and units sold, surrounded by 
dimension tables (for example, time and geography) containing 
more subjected-oriented and hierarchical information.  Data marts 
contain a considerable amount of summary information to deliver 
performance and a business-unit slant to the contents. 
The second form uses an MDB, which in general summarizes the 
contents in advance and delivers rapid responses to queries that 
cross multiple dimensions.  A third approach, essentially a hybrid of 
the relational and MDB techniques, is aimed at giving the data mart 
the combination of MDB speed and RDBMS scalability. 
These technologies can be used in a standalone configuration, 
drawing data directly from an operational system — an increasingly 
common configuration in the context of an ERP application.  ERP 
suppliers either alone or in league with their third party partners are 
beginning to deliver data marts based on the MDB and/or relational 
model. 
From another perspective, rather than the batch-download models 
described above, some enterprises use a process often called 
integrated or dependent data marts.  These enterprises create 
dependent data marts that leverage the data warehouse’s 
transformed data.  The information in the data mart is directly 
AberdeenGroup  16
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
dependent on the data warehouse.  Using this methods, some user 
organizations deliver information to MDB-driven data marts that are 
geared for computationally-intensive applications such as what-if 
analysis in budgeting. 
The Advantages of an Integrated Data Mart
Data mart integration must be viewed from several perspectives. 

Dependent or integrated data marts eliminate redundant data 
feeds, and they can dramatically reduce the amount of 
duplicated detail and summary data.  More importantly, the 
dependent topology guards against inaccurate queries.  As 
independent data marts proliferate, various departments are in 
danger of querying metrics (such as revenue) that 
inadvertently have different meanings in other departments, 
resulting in inconsistencies across departments and erroneous 
information. 

Suppliers are increasingly delivering systems that include the 
capability to automatically transformation legacy or warehouse 
data, and semi-automatically build and populate star schemas 
or MDBs.  These systems, many of which include other 
analytical tools, significantly reduce the cost of data marts and 
the time to install them, and they require less expertise than 
other data mart variations. 

ERP suppliers, either alone or in league with their third party 
partners, are delivering integrated data marts, based on the 
MDB and/or relational model.  These systems are specifically 
tuned for analyzing an ERP system.  Equally important, the 
systems contain facilities designed to ease the technologist’s 
burden when trying to grapple with the ERP system’s complex 
data structures and puzzling  abbreviations as part of the 
transformation process involved in creating the data mart. 
Relational OLAP
Relational OLAP, or ROLAP, combines flexible query capabilities 
with a scalable multi-tier architecture, and symbiotically depends on 
and leverages the evolving and improving capabilities of parallel-
scalable relational databases.  ROLAP prepares an RDBMS to enable 
business users to view and analyze its contents from multiple 
perspectives.  In addition user often have access to sophisticated drill 
down and pivoting capabilities typically associated with OLAP.  
ROLAP technologies are found in many industries, particularly 
AberdeenGroup 17
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
where customer populations have caused databases to swell with 
hundreds of gigabytes of customer-centric data.  Enterprises with 
these conditions typically need to supply business users with 
multidimensional views of information across many dimensions. 
Moreover, with the increased popularity and the economics of the 
Web, Relational OLAP has been accepted by information providers 
in numerous industries as one of the vehicles for “harvesting” their 
databases contents and sending that information to their customers. 
These multi-tier architectures are similarly effective within intranet 
installations, particularly for broadly disseminating— via scheduling 
techniques — analytical views to business users who have Web 
browsers (refer to Figure 3).
How Relational OLAP Works
ROLAP typically consists of: 

A meta data repository for identifying the contents of the 
warehouse. 

An SQL generator that computes aggregates, consolidations, 
and cross tabulations and analyzes multidimensional data. 

Desktop applications that range from simple ad hoc querying to 
linked query-reports; decision-support development 
environment. 
Figure 3: Web-ROLAP Architecture
Server
Hardware
WWW
Server
SQL
Engine
& Meta Data
Intranet --Private
Internet --Public
WWW Browsers
Any Client O/S
Any Client Hardware
RDBMS
Platform
Source: AberdeenGroup, June 1998
AberdeenGroup  18
Data Knowledge Practice Summary

Intelligent agents and alerts (also found in other OLAP 
environments) that run analyses in the background, and notify 
workers when a pre-defined condition or exception is 
encountered; as well as systems-specific agents and facilities 
that examine query and summarization patterns, helping an 
administrator refine the system.
A prerequisite for implementing ROLAP software is skill in 
"dimensional modeling."  This process transforms the RDBMS so that 
it can deliver a multidimensional perspective of the RDBMS and 
organizes information into a schema that closely matches the 
business.  This process creates what is called the star schema design 
(or one of its many complicated variants)  The basic star schema 
design may contain a fact table comprised, for example, of sales 
information such as gross revenue and units sold, surrounded by 
dimension tables (such as, time and geography) containing more 
subjected-oriented and hierarchical information.
The dimension tables are typically denormalized: the data is 
repetitively stored in tables to minimize the need to perform time-
consuming joins when executing a query and to reduce the number 
of rows that must be analyzed to return results.  Snowflake schemas 
extend the star schema by adding normalized dimension tables, a 
technique that can improve performance. 
Enterprises have two primary options in ROLAP.  Some systems 
perform all processing — for example, joins, aggregations, and 
calculations — within the database by using temporary tables, then 
issue results.  Others conduct OLAP analysis on a middle tier but 
perform resource-intensive multi-pass queries within the database 
to spare the network from data overload.
The Advantages of a Refined ROLAP System
Many of ROLAP tools offer highly refined facilities that that can help 
administrators — and in many instances the system itself — find and 
maintain a cost-efficient balance in the ways the systems uses 
summary and detail data.  Many of these systems can automatically 
route, and in some instance rewrite, a user's query to go against 
aggregate, rather than low-level, data.  These processes can reduce 
the numerous forms of overhead an unbalanced system can cause 
when calculating millions of rows to answer a query, as well as the 
AberdeenGroup 19
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
overhead imposed by the summarization, or aggregation, techniques 
used to reduce calculation overhead.  Moreover, these systems are 
able, for example, to hold in cache frequently used queries and the 
reports built with them.  In addition, refined systems are tightly 
integrated with the RDBMS and designed as to function as an 
extension to the database. 
Multidimensional Databases 
Multidimensional databases contain highly summarized data and 
are designed to deliver a fast analytical platform for numerous 
forms of comparative analysis.  Many of these databases are part of 
the analytical arsenal of analysts, brand managers, and product 
managers.  These specialists use the systems for many business-
critical functions, including activities-based costing, complex 
modeling, and quantitative analysis.  Many of these systems contain 
embedded mathematical formulas for tasks commonly required by 
specialists.  MDBs typically include well-tuned front-end tools and 
applications specifically pointed at industry niches.  These tools have 
now reached a point in their evolution at which they can work with 
standard query/reporting/analysis environments and no longer 
demand proprietary front-ends. 
How MDBs Work 
There are several different types of MDBS, ranging from simple 
desktop spreadsheets to server-based systems.  Although variations 
abound, the systems are fundamentally based on the notion of 
arrays, an organizational principal for arranging and storing related 
data so that it can be viewed from multiple perspectives.  Data 
within these systems is summarized, arranged in cross-tabular 
views.
Preparing high-end systems requires skill in modeling the database.  
Suppliers offer little help in this area, and many of these databases 
can be dramatically different from each other.  To combat the data 
explosion, which is driven by summarization techniques and 
numerous empty spaces in an array, the more proficient systems 
offer highly-effective sparse-matrix technology to compress arrays.
These systems contain their own highly-tuned database loading 
environments, and can work with both operational systems and data 
warehouses.  Most MDBs draw data from operational systems via 
AberdeenGroup  20
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
batch interfaces, but many are now building real-time interfaces, 
with a particular eye on performing real-time analysis at various 
points throughout the enterprise. 
Over the past few years these systems have evolved significantly.  
Largely used in departmental applications — as a high-speed data 
mart, for example — many of these systems can:

Update the database incrementally while providing users with 
continued access;

Backup and restore in the event of a failure;

Connect to multiple database, including RDBMSs, and interact 
together; and

Subset portions of the database cube for individual analysis 
and manipulation, and use this technique for on-going, non-
disruptive refreshing of the database. 
Query/Reporting/Analysis Tools
When line-of-business managers and information-systems 
executives search for business intelligence software, they are placing 
that investigation in the context of decision-enabling an entire 
enterprise.  Enterprises turn to Query/ Reporting/Analysis software 
to supply the needs of three broad categories of business users — 
analysts, managers, and nonspecialist information consumers.  
These users clearly have multiple requirements: 

Most users will have bread-and-butter queries that they have 
either built themselves or have had built for them, and which 
are periodically refreshed with new data and new results. 

Some may need to analyze summary information from multiple 
perspectives before drilling into the details.

Many will need to build ad hoc queries.

Others may pick up and refine/extend an analysis where a 
colleague has left off on previous activities and queries.

Other users may only need to look at the results published by 
others. 
These Query/Reporting/analysis tools are typically judged on how 
well they are able to meet these needs, particularly in how they 
address the requirements of distinct user populations. 
AberdeenGroup 21
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
How Query/Reporting/Analysis Systems Work 
The data sources for any of these types of analyses are numerous: 
data warehouses; data marts; multidimensional databases; 
operational systems, including ERP; and third-party applications, 
including CIS.  With few exceptions, most systems can be 
implemented in client-server configurations and on Web Servers for 
both intranet and extranet usage.
With highly-refined point-and-click interfaces administrators can:

Transform difficult SQL into business language terms and 
stores them in an catalogs;

Embed formulas — e.g., sales revenue; dimensions, e.g., time, 
city, product data, account; as well as numerical data, e.g., sales, 
profits, and gross margins — within meta data;

Established data access privileges;

Alter business rules and access privileges and automatically 
reflect the changes throughout the user community; 

Build reports for users that automatically absorb fresh data, 
thus sparing users from having to build reports;

Distribute and balance processing loads throughout the 
environment.
End-users, depending on their job functions, access reports from the 
servers or use desktop cubes, variously called micro cubes and hyper 
cubes.  A cube is an array structure similar to familiar spreadsheets.  
Because these tools can translate queries into multidimensional 
cubes, implementers do not have to build full cubes in advance, and 
worry about refreshing them.  Business analysts are able to 
automatically build and populate individual multidimensional 
cubes.  Query generators then respond to a user’s request by 
selecting the among the best detail and summary data to complete a 
request.
Flexibility in many of these tools encourage workgroup sharing.  For 
example, a business user can E-mail a cube to a colleague, who can 
continue with the analysis as if it originated on his or her desk, thus 
eliminating the need to re-create the query that prompted the 
results. 
Data Mining 
Data mining is a method of data analysis designed to uncover 
valuable, unsuspected, or unknown relationships, patterns, and 
AberdeenGroup  22
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
associations in large, complex databases.  These methods are now 
being applied to considerably smaller data sets, as well.  Data 
mining, which has roots in artificial intelligence and statistics, can 
give enterprises novel perspectives on their data and on their 
business practices, and can be a key technology in a decision-support 
environment. 
Data mining tools, in general, apply programmed formulae, called 
algorithms, to large amounts of data in such a way that the data 
reveals hidden patterns and relationships and uncover correlations 
that were previously invisible to workers and the business.  Data 
mining tools, as a class, help the enterprise understand customer 
behavior, predict events and expose the sometimes subtle linkages 
between events and trends.  Data mining enterprises have attested to 
discovering new business opportunities and to saving millions of 
dollars with a few passes of an algorithm against a pool of data.  For 
example, large multinational banks have been able to use data 
mining to assist in discovering programs and the potential for new 
instruments that will stop attrition among their most profitable 
customers.  At the same time, banks have been able to avoid 
attracting the wrong customers into the fold.
These dramatic benefits are typically associated with the more 
sophisticated class of data mining software, as opposed to the 
desktop variety, which have proven beneficial to business analysts 
seeking day-to-day guidance while performing queries.  The more 
sophisticated tools, which Aberdeen refers to as scalable data 
mining, typically exercise their algorithms on either a representative 
sample of a database or on an entire data set.  These algorithms are 
used for:

Predicting, or classifying the value of a business interaction to 
the enterprise. 

Clustering, or grouping a database according to specific 
attributes in preparation for an analyst’s interpretations 
(Clustering delineates customer or product relationships in a 
database.  For example, a line of business could segment its 
customers into groups that have similar tendencies to buy 
particular products or services). 

Searching  for affinities by seeking related events (called 
associations) and sequences.  For example, events are said to be 
AberdeenGroup 23
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
associated when a customer purchases a product or service 
while purchasing another product or service; sequence looks 
for associations between the purchase of different sets of 
products and services at different times.
How A Functioning Data Mining System Works
Data mining is more about data preparation (and extraction) than 
the sometimes wonderful possibilities of any given algorithm or set 
of algorithms.  To unleash the power of these scalable data mining 
tools, enterprises must select, clean, and transform their data; 
perhaps integrate data brought in from outside sources; and 
essentially establish a recognizable environment for data mining 
algorithms.
These procedures typically demand — at least initially — the skills of 
data mining experts.  These experts apply their modeling skills in an 
iterative and interactive development process of testing, validating, 
and pruning that leads to the development of better models. 
After data and model preparation, running an algorithm against data 
is the most crucial data mining issue.  Executing an algorithm can 
take from days to minutes, depending on size and complexity; 
subsequent iterations require additional time, depending essentially 
on the size of the data set.  Speed may be the most decisive factor in 
achieving success.  For some data mining projects, an hour may be 
acceptable; for others, woefully inadequate. 
The Advantage Of An Integrated Solution
Although users prefer a turnkey software solution that addresses a 
specific vertical-industry application, most suppliers to date have 
only delivered templates that help run algorithms against data.  A 
complete, vertically tailored solution demands professional services. 
To deliver these services, the supplier must possess business 
knowledge for the specific application and data mining domain 
knowledge. 
At stake is the value of turning to a data mining system.  By 
misapplying a data mining tool, an enterprise can squander new 
market opportunities, not to mention millions of hard dollars.  The 
more a solution is integrated (even if it is potentially less powerful), 
the easier the adoption curve for the end-user organization.
AberdeenGroup  24
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Customer Relationship Management 
CRM systems are designed to help enterprises track and respond to 
customer behavior, typically by automating the analyses of customer 
like and dislikes, grouping them into segments, and running various 
promotions and campaigns to stimulated buying and loyalty.  
Adjusting management’s perspective and the products or financial 
instruments of the enterprise so that both continue to address the 
desires of high-response, high-payback customers has been the 
rational behind the CRM systems.  These systems are also called 
marketing customer information files (MCIFs) in the finance and 
banking industries. 
Although the evolution of CRM systems is part of a tangled history, 
and many enterprises, suppliers, and service bureaus are evolving, 
Aberdeen is concerned in particular with the emergence of high-end 
CRM systems.  These CRM and MCIF systems require several 
interlocking and “calibrated” technologies, based on a foundation of 
RDBMSs and scalable parallel processors.  These data-, labor-, and 
technology-intensive database marketing facilities attempt to create 
a “closed-loop” that enables the enterprise to:

Strengthen customer relationships and cross sell by using 
carefully targeted campaigns that track customers responses to 
marketing endeavors.

Reduce the expense of direct mailing. 

Benchmark huge amounts of data.

Use data mining techniques to predict customer attrition, 
profitability, and promotion response, as well as to identify top 
customers.

Weave customer intelligence into the entire enterprise, 
including such bread-and butter functions such as budgeting. 

Push relevant information out to customer-facing applications 
such as, for example, Sales Force Automation (SFA), in 
applicable industries, or to Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) 
in banking.

Build new markets via new programs and new instruments. 

Change business processes.
How A Functioning CRM System Works
To systematically locate customers whose buying behavior, whether 
as groups or individuals, drives the success of the organization 
AberdeenGroup 25
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
requires the enterprise to understand what data is relevant, how it is 
captured, and how it is moved throughout the enterprise.  This 
logical view is physically modeled, and linked to the underlying 
technologies, which in turn are tuned to each other. 
Furthermore, the enterprise must gather and store customer, 
product and third-party data, perform the cleansing and 
householding functions typically associated with data warehousing.  
User organizations must also continually analyze the information 
with decision support tools, structured applications, and data mining 
algorithms.  These results must be disseminated throughout the 
organization. 
Most of the emerging high-end systems are based on Relational 
Online Analytical Processing (ROLAP) technologies (although 
proprietary database-driven systems are available).  ROLAP allows 
the enterprise to transform an RDBMS into a multidimensional 
database that permits users to perform many OLAP functions, such 
as drilling and pivoting in search for trends.  ROLAP requires 
dimensional modeling, a labor-intensive process of transforming a 
relational database into a multidimensional data store.  Building a 
star or a more intricate form, called a constellation schema, requires 
a deep understanding of RDBMS intricacies.  These preparatory steps 
means that a substantial portion of the CRM is still an in-house built 
system.  CRM systems also contain third-party campaign 
management software for executing the manifold processes of 
evaluating and refining campaigns and tracking their success. 
The Advantages Of a Prepackaged System
High-end CRM systems, which are essentially data warehouse 
applications, are available from most of the well-known data 
warehouse suppliers.  Large-scale CRM systems can cost between 
$1.5 million and $2 million (when consulting is factored).  These 
systems will be less expensive if the enterprise has in place many of 
the data warehousing prerequisites, including an application 
development environment, and facilities for such common tasks as 
cleansing and householding data.
To overcome some of these difficulties, and woo hesitant enterprises 
away from service bureaus, most suppliers (typically hardware and 
database vendors, are trying to streamline the implementation 
AberdeenGroup  26
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
process.  The trend among suppliers is to pre-package the multiple 
components required for a complete CRM system, typically using the 
tools and applications of best-of breed third-party suppliers.  End- 
users then rely on the services of a hardware or software supplier’s 
systems-integration arm, or the services of third-party systems 
integrators.  Each of these integrators typically supply industry-
specific data models, which have been refined from previous 
engagements with other enterprises, though not necessarily in CRM.  
These packages can reduce the time an enterprise spends in 
evaluating the bevy of tools on the market and can translate into 
more efficient use of consulting dollars, which can be better spent on 
tying the CRM backbone to customer-facing applications, or touch 
points. 
Other emerging forms of integration are specifically pointed at the 
intricacies of data mining.  Suppliers and integrators, for example, 
have created code that enables data mining algorithms to work upon 
ROLAP content and database content without having to first “flatten” 
the data, or perform other time-consuming and resource intensive 
RDBMS-preparation steps before exercising the data mining 
algorithms. 
Other packages are now emerging that allow enterprises to either 
leverage existing warehouses without having to precondition the 
warehouse for CRM chores; or to evolve a CRM system, along with 
business processes, via a self-adjusting and expandable data mart. 
Integrating Customer Interaction Software and Data Knowledge 
CIS applications — which include telemarketing, telesales, SFA, 
external customer support/service and internal help desks — access 
and update discrete databases and modules, each designed to excel 
at a specific business task.  The CIS application contains facilities to 
log, track, route, escalate, and close customer calls; and applies 
similar processes for sales and marketing applications.  The CIS or 
customer-support/help desk applications continually record the 
nature of the interaction and summarizes which activities resulted 
in a rapid resolution.  This continual recording of customer 
interaction has resulted in CIS systems also being repositories of 
customer likes and dislikes, buying patterns, and service 
requirements.  In other words, CIS is also a repository of the 
AberdeenGroup 27
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
enterprise’s operational effectiveness.  Operational managers 
throughout the enterprise want to tap in and to understand this 
information.  Enterprises must become adept at analyzing not only 
isolated performance but also interrelated performance of 
complementary business activities. 
To reach deeply into CIS and to search for the underpinnings of 
operational effectiveness necessitates far more than static reports.  
This deeper integration calls for the combined power of ad hoc 
reporting and multidimensional analysis tools.  These facilities must 
be pre-conditioned — by both the CIS supplier and the user 
organization — to allow business workers to dynamically formulate 
their own business questions. 
How an Integrated CIS-DSS System Works 
To achieve this end-user self-sufficiency, the enterprise and its CIS 
suppliers must address the following:

Either the CIS supplier and/or an enterprise’s decision 
support/business specialist first must anticipate the likely 
questions that end-users will ask and then embed the parts of 
the corresponding queries into the tool environment, thus 
preconditioning the tool; 

These same parties must build the data aggregations that not 
only enable end-users to formulate their own business 
questions but also supply the ability to look quickly at results 
across multiple business activities;

The analysis environment must display the information in an 
intuitive format and encourage end-users, each of whom may 
have different skills, to drill down to more granular levels; and

The DSS environment must not impose its mechanisms on the 
way users work, but function as a natural extension of the 
analytical information contained in CIS systems. 
The Advantages of an Integrated CIS-DSS Solution 
Robust DSS tools are now available from many sources, but the 
process of marrying horizontal DSS tools to the enterprise’s best 
practices is often expensive, time consuming and ultimately 
distracting.  A prepackaged tool, which embeds a deep 
understanding of the types of questions different business users will 
ask, dramatically reduces the above expenses.  Moreover, an 
integrated solution can “raise the bar” on CIS support by:
AberdeenGroup  28
Data Knowledge Practice Summary

Supplying business users with the views of information that are 
tailored to the business users specific task; 

Giving a support center a “barometer” of its overall 
effectiveness, as well as of its individual employees;

Allowing the enterprises to proactively measure how well it has 
been building relationships with its customers;

Uncovering the types of knowledge and information that needs 
to be conveyed to employees and customers to strengthen 
interest and loyalty; and

Pinpointing the early warning signals that can direct the 
enterprise toward improving problem resolution, budgeting 
and service commitments.
Aberdeen believes that more integrated solutions will be introduced 
in the next 12-24 months.
Integrating Electronic Commerce & Data Knowledge
Electronic Commerce (EC), as a term, describes computer-to 
computer financial transactions, particularly the selling of products 
directly to Internet buyers and using the Internet as a means to 
integrate and manage business systems and business processes. 
The State of Integration
Much of the current EC-Data Knowledge integration is pointed at 
securely packaging, distributing, and merchandising data over the 
Web to internal users, business partners, and arms-length third-
parties who are willing to pay for it.  This type of integration, 
Aberdeen believes, represents only a first step; the market has much 
more potential.  Suppliers of Query/Reporting/Analysis tools and 
ROLAP software are the typical entrants into data-packaging portion 
of EC.  Using fully encrypted facilities, users typically access data via 
a Web browser to contents that can be offered by subscription, per 
data table or row retrieved, or various combinations of the two.  
Some early Data Knowledge entrants to this market give would-be 
information providers the ability to give their subscribers Web-
based query wizards that help information consumers retrieve the 
data they need.
Beyond the above type of integration, suppliers and user 
organization are wrestling with finding the most expeditious means 
to capture a complete picture of customer behavior and satisfaction, 
AberdeenGroup 29
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
as well as understand how well the user organization is performing 
on the Web.  The goal, in general, is to stimulate buying behavior by 
understanding a customer in the context of demographics and 
psychographics — and act upon that understanding in as close to 
real-time as possible. 
Data Knowledge tools — query/reporting/ analysis tools and 
multidimensional databases in particular — are appended, not 
particularly integrated, at the tail-end of the process stream.  
Whether these tools are directly integrated with a data warehouse or 
a database specifically dedicated to holding Web-captured 
information, user organizations face the challenge of tying together 
Web-generated information with the user organization’s internal 
data.  These two disconnected sources — data contained within Web-
server log files; as well as user-profile data and transaction data 
contained within a user organization’s database— is especially 
problematic. 
Integrating ERP & Data Knowledge
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are the preserve of 
extensive, critical enterprise information.  These systems combine — 
and extend — the principles of manufacturing resource processing 
(MRP) with other enterprise applications such as finance and order 
management.  Because these still evolving systems deliver a 
comprehensive perspective about the enterprise, operations 
managers are intensely interested in obtaining a deeper perspective 
than the report writers that included in these systems can generally 
give them.  Managers want to use these systems, for example, to 
discover the interdependencies in supply chain management 
activities. 
How Data Knowledge and ERP Integration Takes Place
Data Knowledge and ERP integration can take place in various ways 
and to various degrees.  While ERP suppliers are now in the process 
of delivering data mart and data mining extensions to their systems, 
third-party suppliers of many transformation facilities and analysis 
tools have already delivered mechanisms that ease the integration 
process.  In addition to using basic report writers enterprise use the 
following decision support-related strategies with their ERP systems:
AberdeenGroup  30
Data Knowledge Practice Summary

Query/reporting/analysis tools against production data, with 
templates supplied by tool providers to help map meta data 
within these tools to complex ERP schemas;

Siphon ERP data via in-house-built programs or newly 
emerging transformation facilities into RDBMS-driven data 
marts and data warehouses.  These data marts often contain 
extracts from ERP systems of different suppliers; and

Using the same mechanism link the ERP system to an MDB.
The Benefits Of Integration
ERP systems are based on notoriously complex schemas, which can 
change as suppliers issue on-going releases.  Understanding these 
schemas, and the places within ERP meta data where critical 
information is contained, is the principle difficulty in integrating 
DSS-related technologies with the system.  A fully integrated 
package, including pre-tested and complete transforms, as well as 
pre-built and extensible ad hoc and multidimensional views, would 
significantly speedup installations and help enterprises increase the 
value and reduce the labor and expense of the integration.  But 
Aberdeen believes that no such a package exists today.
Missing is the key element of the vertical-industry.  User 
organizations involved in process manufacturing, for example, face 
extremely complex challenges with ERP-DSS integration.  Unlike 
some industries, they do not work with a standard bill of materials.  
Rather, their day-to-day activities focus on highly variable 
components and characteristics — for example, multiple units of 
measures — involving complex structures that vary by batch, by lot, 
and by order.  A truly vertically focused, integrated package could 
deliver the analytics the user organization may not be able to deliver 
by itself.  Moreover, such packages could, for example, focus on 
delivering classical what-if style analysis, or on the difficulty of 
delivering real-time performance indicators with content and form 
that is appropriate for specific users.
AberdeenGroup 31
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Chapter Four
Impact of Major IT Trends

The Internet has been — and will continue to be — the most 
pervasive influence on Data Knowledge technologies, and on 
how enterprises will tactically and strategically deploy them. 
The addition of the Internet means new enterprise and extra-
enterprise users, with many subtle and overt usage differences 
among these user populations.  In addition, the Internet is 
revealing the need for a variety of real-time applications, as 
opposed to batch applications.  The Internet’s ability to allow 
technologists to prepare Data Knowledge environments on a 
centralized server and “narrow cast” views of information 
specifically tailored for individuals is the driver behind in-
house intranets; as well as so-called extranets, which use the 
Internet for secure business-to-business analytic applications.  
The Internet is also changing how third-party information 
providers, for example, carve off slices of their databases for 
their customers, and how they “charge per drink.”  Indeed, the 
Internet is creating the possibility for end-user organizations to 
leverage their infrastructures and become third-party 
information providers. 

The transition to client-server and network-centric applications 
for both suppliers and user organizations involves supporting 
dual strategies.  The Internet has demanded that many 
suppliers recreate significant portions of their technologies, 
adjust their pricing models, and alter the balance between 
direct and indirect channels.  Not only have most suppliers had 
to get closer to the needs of line-of-business users, they have 
had to do so in the context of specific industries.  User 
organizations have another set of considerations.  While 
supporting client-server end-users (for example, business 
analysts) enterprises must now consider what information will 
most benefit the majority of their user constituents.  This 
concern will change many data warehouse topologies, where 
the central warehouse will be organized as a post-data-
transformation facility, designed for feeding data marts, but not 
for information analysis. 

Year 2000 issues, Aberdeen believes, will not drive down 
spending for Data Knowledge, although it is encouraging IT and 
line-of business executives to consider taking a more tactical 
AberdeenGroup  32
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
approach to many of their Data Knowledge needs.  Although the 
depth of the correlation is impossible to measure, the need for 
data mart style and low-cost, quick-install technologies is 
related to resource conservation.  In addition, Global 1000 user 
organizations, have implemented or are well underway with 
their data warehouse infrastructures.  They are now targeting  
infrastructure leveraging applications.  Many of them are now 
cleaning up their still-useful legacy reports and using their 
transformation facilities to catch and rectify potentially 
dangerous Year 2000 code glitches.  Aberdeen believes that Year 
2000 concerns have had a positive effect on users of Data 
Knowledge; many are now less “hyped up” and are judiciously 
choosing their Data Knowledge battles.

Object orientation is particularly relevant for creating and 
administering end-user analysis environments.  Using object-
oriented, inheritance-based administration facilities, one or 
more administrators can build, change, or delete catalogs, and 
alter business rules and access a privileges.  These changes are 
automatically reflected throughout the entire analytical 
environment — a significant feature when supporting 
hundreds or thousands of users.  Object orientation has also 
been an effective underpinning in helping enterprises perform 
intricate financial analyses.  A company’s chart of accounts — 
including balance sheet, income statement; cash flow, tax rates 
and exchange rates —can roll up from multiple perspectives, 
based upon whatever financial calculations reflect the 
organization’s practices.  Rather than working with difficult 
SQL, workers can analyze data by dragging and dropping 
relationships.  When performing a what-if scenario, the 
function of object-oriented inheritance is to recognize those 
portions a process that are affected when performing a 
computation, significantly reducing the processing load 
involved.  Critically important, object-orientation can 
contribute to a financial system’s ability to remain in a 
consolidated state. 

Microsoft’s decision-support threat, in the form of Plato, a 
decision-support technology the company acquired from Israel-
based Panorama software and that Microsoft is now beta 
testing, has been a catalyst to many changes in the decision 
support market, even before its planned shipment later this 
year.  Its presence on PowerPoint slides alone has already 
contributed to driving down the price of many presumable 
competitors.  (This trend was well underway, driven by the 
AberdeenGroup 33
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
economies of the Internet; and Microsoft laid on one more 
straw.)  Moreover, the threat of Plato has been forcing many 
suppliers to escalate developments, which are pointed, 
typically, at higher ground.  Query/Reporting/Analysis software, 
for example, is taking on many of the attributes of ROLAP.  
Many suppliers have publicly embraced Plato, and have 
already or plan to partner with Microsoft — although officials 
of these partners say they are not quite sure what Plato is. 

Plato, which Microsoft has described as a new OLAP server for 
SQL Server 7.0, combines caching techniques with detail and 
aggregate data held in SQL Server.  According to Microsoft, 
Plato can be used as a desktop MDB, ROLAP, and/or a Hybrid of 
the MDB/ROLAP model.  The value of this approach, at least 
according to Microsoft messaging, is that it will spare user 
organizations from most of the ills of other technologies — slow 
initial and incremental loading of databases; database sizes that 
are too large because of technological inflexibility, and high cost 
of ownership.
Supplier Success Factors
Each Data Knowledge supplier is beset with challenges specific to the 
class of tool, but each must demonstrate flexibility across three 
broad categories: custom-built applications, packaged applications, 
and quick-build-and-deploy variations of the previous two 
categories.  Moreover, each Data Knowledge supplier must be able to 
demonstrate how it weds these requirements in the context of a 
specific vertical industry.  (Suppliers of horizontal Data Knowledge 
applications must follow the general tenor of this rule, as well, and 
should be especially concerned with demonstrating how it leverages 
the value of related tools.)  While speed of implementation will 
continue as a measurement criteria, speed is being paired with depth 
in evaluations.  The new measurement criteria will call for suppliers 
— particularly in the data warehouse, data mart, CRM, and ERP/DSS 
space — to demonstrate how close they can come to offering a 
prepackaged solution that can be tuned to the specific needs of an 
enterprise in the shortest period of time.  What follows are some 
supplier considerations for Data Knowledge technologies. 

The data warehouse suppliers, particularly those who had 
positioned themselves as best-of breed suppliers during the 
early phases of data warehousing, now face challenges on 
several fronts.  Early adopters have implemented; many of these 
AberdeenGroup  34
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
leading-edge enterprises are now looking for applications 
rather than infrastructure or plumbing.  Those suppliers 
wishing to attract next-stage data warehouse implementers — 
those enterprises that are trying to play catch up with their 
competitors — need to address the following considerations.

Suppliers must have an NT and an NT-to Unix strategy, 
because new users and the installed base are inclined 
toward quick-install data marts (whether based on the 
relational model or an MDB).

Position the data warehouse as a central facility that can 
feed numerous data marts — whether driven by a 
relational or MDB system — with refreshed data on 
command or subscription.  This topology can reduce 
network and operational-systems overhead caused by 
redundant data feeds and processes.  Moreover it can 
reduce the labor caused by duplicating summary 
information. 

The possession of an industry-specific data model 
combined with the skills of seasoned consultants will be 
not be sufficient to meet the challenges of many user 
organizations.  Success will be based on how well an 
extensible industry data model is related to a specific 
database schema and the chores in a specific industry that 
the schema will help perform. 

Successful suppliers in vertical-industry data warehousing 
have largely embraced ROLAP.  But they are not relational 
purists.  They combine object-oriented techniques, such as 
object linking, and often use C rather than SQL to perform 
selections that essentially establish the “where” clause in a 
query.  The point is not that the merchant database is 
capable of such extensions, but that the supplier using the 
database has wrapped the capability in a data warehouse 
application. 

Those suppliers targeting specific industries should borrow 
a page from suppliers that have “pre-fabricated”, extensible 
data warehouses.  These suppliers have end-user analytical 
environments comprised of a combination of structured 
applications and ad hoc querying. 
AberdeenGroup 35
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 

Data marts, which are generally departmental in nature, need 
to confront many of the same problems as data warehouses, 
albeit on a different scale.  Speed, depth, and extensiblity — 
with a heavy dose of industry-specific/departmental content — 
will drive supplier success. 

Suppliers must have also an NT and an NT-to Unix strategy. 

Newer relationally-driven data mart technologies should 
include transformation environments for bringing legacy 
information into the data mart, for organizing this content 
for analysis, and for periodically refreshing the 
environment. 

Pure MDBs in a data mart context will have difficulty 
taking the prepackaged route, principally because the 
power of these tools is directly related to the enterprise’s 
multidimensional modeling skills.  The MDB suppliers will 
increase their value to a larger segment of the enterprise 
when they introduce methodologies that can ease this 
burden. 

Suppliers of pure MDBs need to demonstrate the prowess 
of their technologies as the underpinning of an applications 
—for example, budgeting, financial systems, and balance 
score cards. 

Relational OLAP suppliers face increased competition from a 
variety of sources, particularly at the low end of their market.  
Query/Reporting/Analysis tools, which obviously work with 
relational databases, are beginning to blur some of the 
boundaries.  Another competitive incursion is being led by MDB 
suppliers, as they refine their systems to tackle larger amounts 
of data and tighten integration with various relational 
databases.  Further competition is coming from vertical-
industry data warehouses and data mart suppliers; these 
suppliers have created innovative schema building facilities 
and/or have used object-oriented extensions.  To be successful 
ROLAP suppliers must consider:

Partnering with other suppliers that have an entrenched 
presence in specific industries and cooperating with these 
suppliers to tighten the integration (via code) between each 
of the tools. 
AberdeenGroup  36
Data Knowledge Practice Summary

Continuing to demonstrate a proficiency on the Web that 
helps create new classes of information providers for 
specific industries. 

Running repeatable benchmarks with RDBMS and 
hardware suppliers to demonstrate the performance of 
ROLAP analysis against chores (with many dimensions and 
at a deep detail level) that no other technology can 
perform.

Finding ways to speed up the creation of star schemas and 
other variations of the star via automatic or semi-automatic 
schema generators.  Database administrators (DBAs)could 
extend the value of these generators with dimensional 
modeling techniques.

Multidimensional databases (MDBs) are especially effective 
when integrated within applications, such as financial 
accounting.  The ability of relevant workers to write to the MDB 
is a key benefit, although not all MDBs support this function.  
MDBs effectively participate in the creation of multiple rollups, 
for such activities as operating, legal, and product 
consolidations.  MDBs facilitate what-if analysis.  The speed of 
an MDB is a fundamental part of keeping a financial system 
current, as well as for prompt closes.  MDBs are also effective 
mechanisms for supplying mangers and other executives with 
up-to-date reports on the financial state of the enterprise.  
Although suppliers of MDBs have made tremendous strides in 
refining their systems to leverage the Web and in deepening 
integration with RDBMS suppliers should consider:

Providing facilities that reduce the now burdensome chore 
of modeling the database.

Augmenting batch loading with real-time loading facilities.

Building better links to operational applications such as 
ERP.

Tightening integration with transformation facilities that 
are now used for data warehouses and RDBMS-based data 
mart.

Creating meta data facilities that help cube developers of 
leverage existing cubes and databases.

Leveraging these facilities by exposing the contents to 
analysts that need access to data residing in separate cubes.
AberdeenGroup 37
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 

Participating with RDBMS suppliers in building optimizers 
that can automatically point a query to either and RDBMS 
or to a MDB.

Query/Reporting/Analysis tools are in a seemingly 
continuous transformation — a state driven principally by 
the reception of the Internet as an economical means of 
distribution.  Suppliers of these tools first and foremost 
must demonstrate their prowess on intranets and 
extranets, and relate their value-add to analysts, managers, 
or non-specialist information consumers.  Suppliers must 
also reduce the burden of the technologists responsible for 
building and administering these systems.  Moreover, new 
entrants to the market must face the financial and technical 
wherewithal of suppliers already dominating this space.  
To win, suppliers must: 

Add facilities that will meet the needs of enterprise 
reporting.  This concept is essentially an IT-driven 
approach to supplying a virtually unlimited number of 
users, customers, and partners with access to management-
blessed information contained within key enterprise data 
sources, and it is secure and centrally managed. 

Build systems that run in Web and/or client-server-
configurations.  The browser interface should reflect the 
skills of the users.  Suppliers should consider avoiding 
attempts to re-create their desktop functionality on 
browsers.  Specialists will continue to use the client-server 
configurations. 

Provide security.  End-users will stress test backdoor access 
through report servers and catalogs.

Deliver strong facilities for quickly developing hyperlinked 
reports and individual report subsets, using shared 
libraries of reusable object.  They must also have the ability 
to schedule the running and printing of batch reports.

Provide support for NT and Unix.

Deliver systems that can access data from virtually any 
source in any format. 

Data mining suppliers, particularly of the enterprise-class tools, 
must realistically confront the needs of LOB users who sponsor 
the project.  These users are looking for technologies that 
AberdeenGroup  38
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
demonstrate value in specific vertical-industry applications, 
and against even more refined challenges such as CRM systems. 
Successful suppliers need to provide: 

Scalability , or the ability of the data mining toolset to 
quickly analyze large amounts of the data. 

Vertical focus via application templates (a.k.a. frameworks) 
or business-domain knowledge that the LOB can use to 
build the data mining application.

Professional services that can assist the user organization 
in implementing and refining data mining projects.

Multi-platform support, which increases the likelihood that 
the supplier’s toolset runs on an enterprise’s existing 
platforms.

Breadth, or the ability of a data mining toolset to perform 
more than one of the three basic data mining functions: 
prediction, clustering, and affinity. 

Depth, or the possession of  more than one algorithm to 
targeted at the same function, say, clustering.  Depth gives 
the enterprise flexibility of choice. 

Life-cycle support, or the ability of the data mining tools to 
ease the burden of data preparation, and the process of 
refining models. 

The ability of the tools to integrate with existing data 
warehouses.

Sampling, or the ability to use a subset of data to predict, 
for example, trends existing within a larger data set.
Suppliers should focus on ease of use, not only during the modeling 
phase but for the business user who must understand the results.  
Command line interfaces must be replaced with GUIs.

Customer Relationship Management can be viewed as an 
extension of data warehousing and data mart principles, but 
those suppliers that fail to take into account customer-facing 
applications (such as Sales Force Automation), and the on-going 
need for the enterprise to adjust its processes toward the 
customer will find themselves struggling against new entrants 
to this market, as well as the resurgence of newly recreated 
marketing-data service bureaus.  Below are several 
considerations that should increase a CRM suppliers success in 
the market.
AberdeenGroup 39
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 

Eliminate the unrealistic expectation that the CRM facility 
can truly deliver one-to-one marketing.  Buyers are wary of 
such claims.

Offer industry specific data models that speed-up 
implementation and elevate the consulting role.

Integrate core technologies — for example, relational 
databases, data mining, and campaign management 
software — with code, as opposed to mere APIs.  An 
example is the ability of a data mining algorithm to work 
seamlessly with a ROLAP environment, obviating the need 
to “flatten” relational data to work with the data mining 
tool. 

Examine and potentially include new, sophisticated 
schemas that combine automatic schema-building facilities 
with business rules embedded within meta data.  As 
business rules change, the system automatically adjusts its 
schema to reflect the changes.  This type of facility permits 
the enterprise not only to adjust its CRM iteratively, but, 
equally important, to build it iteratively.  Moreover, the 
schema can easily give end-users the ability to  
transparently move between, say, orders and shipments.  
Those suppliers counting solely on the power of the 
RDBMS, ROLAP, and scalable hardware to perform 
database-intensive CRM chores will only have solved a 
portion of CRM problem.

Look for technologies that reduce the workload on RDBMS. 
Real-time multidimensional analysis techniques, 
particularly those designed to hold the MDB in cache, can 
help pinpointing customer populations that have specific 
characteristics, and speed up the relevant analysis on that 
user population. 

Partner with emerging suppliers that have expertise in 
capturing Internet transactions.

Create bi-directional information flows between customer 
facing applications and the central CRM facility and create 
integration partnerships with suppliers specializing in 
these technologies.

Integrating Customer Interaction Software and DSS.  Most 
suppliers that have opened CIS to the scrutiny of decision 
AberdeenGroup  40
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
support have not tailored DSS access to the unique 
characteristics of CIS.  And the overriding weakness with most 
current DSS-CIS integration is that it places multiple burdens on 
the shoulders of the user organization.  Aberdeen believes that 
the competitive edge will go to suppliers that have adopted 
decision support as a central design feature of their CIS 
applications.  This integration must be pointed toward the user 
organization’s need to integrate customer-support applications 
with complementary systems used for telemarketing, telesales, 
and sales force automation.  These systems must anticipate that 
user organizations recognize that changes in one business 
activity will likely effect another activity.  What follows are 
considerations that suppliers can factor for deepening CIS-DSS 
integration:

Combine multidimensional query and reporting tools as 
well as simple query and reporting software into a 
framework. 

Include templates that anticipate the majority of questions 
workers will ask of CIS, and the guidance to create the 
logical and physical connections necessary to answer the 
questions. 

Add value by aiming guidance at the needs of different 
classes of users and at the types of correlations that would 
benefit a worker's task. 

Devise the system so that each activity rolls up to a 
summary level, expressed in a highly visual and therefore 
easily digestible manner. 

Prepared the system to permit not only detail-data 
explorations but examinations of cross-functional 
relationships when required (refer to user success factors 
for suggested cross functions).

Include facilities for real-time decision support, delivered 
via push technology, and pointed at helping support center 
representatives with such activities as cross-selling.

Add software agent facilities that can automatically notify 
end-users when certain thresholds are exceeded.

Integrating Electronic Commerce and Data Knowledge — 
beyond the current practices of selling views of a database over 
the Web or of pulling contents from EC-databases into data 
warehouses or data marts — is one of the biggest challenges 
AberdeenGroup 41
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
facing EC and Data Knowledge suppliers, alike.  By partnering 
with suppliers and systems integrators specializing in EC, 
suppliers of data marts and OLAP-style tools have a compelling 
opportunity to pre-build specialized data marts to support line 
management responsibilities, particularly in the areas of 
marketing and customer service.  Other opportunities abound.  
What follows is a shortlist of EC Market segments and areas in 
which Data Knowledge analysis can be embedded.

Marketing, including product marketing collaboration, 
marketing intelligence collaboration, on-line promotions, 
support of sales.

Customer service, help desk and transaction status.

Distribution and logistics, including logistics planning.

Procurement, including order processing, billing, cross 
supplier analysis, analysis of buyers’ behavior (for both the 
customer and the buyer).

Sales to order, including analysis of trend analysis who is 
buying what products, and fulfillment success, and spot 
market analysis. 

Supply Chain Management and logistics (refer below to 
Integrating ERP and Data Knowledge). 
Suppliers hoping to dominate the EC/Data Knowledge space need to 
take above usage scenarios into account when developing products 
and technologies. 

Integrating ERP and Data Knowledge is still at a relatively 
primitive stage, although many Data Knowledge suppliers have 
made significant strides in various ways to help locate, 
transform, and analyze the contents of an ERP application.  
However, suppliers vying for attention in this category cannot 
afford to view ERP as just another source for a data warehouse, 
data mart, or analytical environment.  The reason is that ERP is 
changing dramatically.  Aberdeen is witnessing a convergence 
of processes across functional applications, or domains.  
Although within these domains suppliers and user 
organizations understand the underlying data sources, 
increasing specialization by vertical industry will necessitate 
that suppliers add value via industry-specific expertise in an 
ERP/supply-chain context.  Furthermore, each of the leading 
ERP suppliers has embarked on programs to supply Data 
Knowledge abilities as part of the effectiveness of their solution. 
AberdeenGroup  42
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
As Data Knowledge suppliers hunt for markets that will propel 
their success that suppliers should consider:

Entering into formal technology integration programs and 
partnerships with ERP suppliers to fill a voids that an ERP 
supplier cannot address alone, whether because of time or 
tool-specific knowledge.

Specializing in specific industries and specific domains as 
opposed to applying a broad brush stroke to ERP.

Concentrating on delivering real-time analytics, 
particularly performance indicators in a content and form 
that is appropriate for many different types of users.

Focusing on the reduction of the overhead that direct 
analysis against and ERP application causes.
Refining the analytical environment so that it is tuned 
to rapidly capturing on the changing data. 
AberdeenGroup 43
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
User Success Factors
Data Warehouse 
First and foremost data warehouses require buy-in from executive 
management.  Once that vote has been obtained, numerous user 
organizations interviewed by Aberdeen recommend following a 
formal methodology, geared toward highly focused, iterative 
development cycles.  This iterative approach to building interlocking 
data warehouse pieces (for example, in different subject areas) has 
given many enterprises a quicker return on a data warehouse 
investment.  For those enterprise adopting a packaged, vertical-
industry-specific data warehouse, a formal methodology used as a 
yard stick can help the enterprise perceive the value in the package 
and estimate what role in-house resources, the supplier, or a third-
party consultant needs to bring to the final steps of “stitching” the 
prepackage warehouse into a working solution.
Moreover, Aberdeen believes that the earlier in the cycle and the 
more accurately an enterprise refines its data warehouse strategy, 
the more likely it will accrue the twin benefits of scalability and 
processing-resource conservation.  Those user organizations 
interviewed recommend soliciting the consulting help of suppliers 
and systems integrators for one or more of the numerous steps in 
planning and building a data warehouse.  From a macro view, the 
user organization should be concerned with the ability of the system 
to change over time, to scale, and to adapt to technological 
innovations that affect the warehouse as well as technologies that 
leverage the warehouse. 
The chief concern of course is that the warehouse is geared toward 
answering the business questions of users.  Those users can be 
directly analyzing data warehouse contents or using those contents 
on another platform, for example, a data mart.  User needs should be 
thoroughly understood at the outset of a warehouse project.  What 
follows are key recommendations for users evaluating data 
warehouse implementations:

A shortlist of data warehousing steps must include,  
interviewing representatives of the end-users who will need to 
work with the data warehouse; architecture planning, 
including whether the data warehouse will support analysis or 
will serve solely as a feeding system to data marts; database 
AberdeenGroup  44
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
design; project planning; platform selection; identification of 
business metrics; project management; business rules 
modeling, data modeling; business subject area analysis; 
subject area implementation; business analysis; data 
warehouse design reviews; sizing and capacity planning; 
locating the legacy data and determining the transformations, 
and cleansing the data where appropriate.

Because data warehouses are composed of many parts and 
processes, successful user organizations often recommend 
soliciting a request for proposal at several phases of the 
implementation cycle.  Where consultants are called in, success 
in terms of speed of implementation is directly related to the 
consulting teams vertical industry skills in data warehousing.  
The skills of two consultants — one who has an understanding 
of a vertical industry and another skilled in data warehousing 
are not necessarily equal to a single consultant who has 
vertical-industry data warehousing skills. 

At team composed of a business sponsor, an IT representative 
(typically a DBA who will become the steward of the 
warehouse), and a representative of each user constituency are 
typically needed to drive a data warehouse to success. 

To secure end-user buy-in, these individuals must be brought in 
at the outset of the project. 
Data Mart
Many of the issues listed above can serve as guidance for the 
creation of the data mart, but the steps for building a data mart are 
less rigid.  This is because data marts are largely controlled by the 
business unit in which they reside; business units "contract" with 
information systems departments to supply the data needed for 
analysis. 
Whatever the technology platforms an enterprise selects, Aberdeen 
believes that the individual business units within the enterprise 
should at least work from a high-level (as opposed to detailed) data 
model and common enterprise metrics.  Common metrics, such as 
Revenue, will ensure that separate analysts are working from the 
same set of assumptions.  Whether the user organization uses 
dependent or independent data marts will be based on many factors. 
Chief among them is whether or not the organization has a 
AberdeenGroup 45
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
warehouse.  Below are some of the considerations for successful data 
marts:

Make sure that the data mart will be able to answer the 
questions of its users and that the style of interaction with the 
system is consistent with the skills and tastes of these users. 

Anticipate whether the data mart will need to grow vertically, 
horizontally through the addition of more data marts, or 
whether the system will be used to answer a short-term need 
before being discarded.

Make sure that the underlying hardware, whether NT- or Unix-
based, can be expanded vertically and horizontally without 
disrupting operations. 

Many data marts have been developed that significantly reduce 
the time for installation, and allow in-house implementers to 
bring the system into production without outside help.  These 
systems are typically pointed at horizontal applications, such as 
sales and marketing.  More sophisticated data mart 
implementations, which are aimed at analyzing characteristic 
of specific businesses within specific industries,  should follow 
the spirit of data warehousing.  Thus user organizations should 
look for supplier of hardware or software and systems 
integrators that are skilled in both the data mart and the 
industry. 

Project teams are typically composed of technologists from the 
LOB that will deploy and control the warehouse; 
representatives of the users who will access the systems; and a 
representative of the IT community who will negotiate service 
level commitments for delivering data. 
Relational Online Analytical Processing
ROLAP is exceptionally good at handling large data set challenges 
and leveraging the advance indexing structures of RDBMSs.  
Successful user organizations interviewed by Aberdeen expressed 
the need to engage in detailed up-front planning.  Usually 
consultants from the ROLAP supplier, as opposed to RDBMS and 
hardware suppliers, were mentioned as critical for “calibrating” 
these big environments to the needs of large (multiple-hundreds) of 
users.  Of particular importance is the need to:

Treat the underlying dimensional modeling requirements as 
part of the process of building the data warehouse or the data 
mart.  By doing so, the user organization is inclined to follow 
AberdeenGroup  46
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
the typical best practices that have evolved in the data 
warehouse and data mart disciplines. 

Look for a ROLAP supplier that has been in the user 
organization’s industry and that can prove its success at 
running applications having similar characteristics.

When choosing a ROLAP solution within the context of a pre-
packaged vertical application, make sure that total application 
is flexible enough to allow changes in the future.

Thoroughly evaluate whether the most relevant ROLAP 
processing styles can fit within the user organization’s 
architecture and network requirement.  Some processing styles 
perform all processing — joins, aggregations, and calculations 
— within the database by using temporary tables, then issue 
results.  Others parcel these chores between the SQL engine, 
which performs user-defined analytics and other common 
types of analysis, while performing resource-intensive multi-
pass queries within the database.  Each has their implications 
for network traffic and the load on the RDBMSs.
Multidimensional Databases
MDBs are typically deployed and managed by the line of business.  
Technologists in the LOB need to have an especially deep 
understanding of the application and the technology.  The value of 
supplier consulting to the user organization is directly dependent on 
whether the implementer has experience with the specific 
technology.  Where consulting is applied, knowledge transfer is a key 
criteria. 
Successful users of MDBs have matched application needs to the 
different types and variations of multidimensional technology.  Core 
elements include:

Client-side MDBs, which down load data from RDBMSs or other 
MDBs and which are particularly good for analyzing megabytes 
of information. 

Server MDBs, which typically store all the dimensions and pre-
calculate most of the data, thus providing analytical speed.  
Many have commonly used industry specific calculations 
embedded within them. 

Multicube architectures, which generally create smaller 
multidimensional structures, called cubes, that comprise an 
entire cube.  These structures can be very effective when data 
AberdeenGroup 47
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
changes frequently because architectural tricks allow the data 
in the discrete cubes to be refreshed without affecting other 
cubes.

RAM-based MDBs, which hold the multidimensional structure 
in memory, are particularly fast, correspondingly expensive, 
and low on the scalability chart.

A hybrid of ROLAP and MDBs, which can solve in many 
instances the slow query speed of ROLAP and the database size 
limitations of current MDBs also exist.  These systems allow 
joins between MDB and relational data. 

Using these basic technologies as a foundation, successful user 
organizations analyze a matrix of factors including :

Whether one or more of the technologies can perform the 
analytics required for the application.

The time required to model, initially load, remodel and refresh 
the multidimensional structure and how that measure will 
affect the application itself as well as data processing windows 
of the feeding transaction windows.

The proven success of a given technology within the vertical 
industry. 

Whether the line of business or IT have the skill needed to work 
with a particular MDB.  The skills needed for one systems do 
not necessarily carry over to other systems.

If the users have or can acquire the skills to interact with the 
MDB. 
Query/Reporting/Analysis
User organizations that have successfully implemented this style of 
application to a broad spectrum of end-users have generally evolved 
their architectures in lock-step with refinements that suppliers have 
been able to make over the years.  Since success is directly 
dependent on fashioning a system that different types of end-users 
will find beneficial, these organizations have spent considerable time 
in analyzing the different needs of users.  Since user interest in the 
facilities is a major aspect of success, even small departmental 
systems must thoroughly represent user needs.  These user groups 
include:

Business analysts, who typically require desktop versions of the 
tool for ad hoc queries, multidimensional analysis, and to serve 
a role as authors of reports to other users.
AberdeenGroup  48
Data Knowledge Practice Summary

Executives and managers, who need Web-based reports, with 
light multidimensional analysis and querying.  These are 
typically performed through the help of pre-established, though 
flexible, parameter-driven reports.

Knowledge workers, who require browser-based facilities that 
permit some ad hoc access, and are particularly enthusiastic 
about “paramaterized” query and reporting.

Information consumers, the largest majority of workers who 
need browser-based access to relevant canned queries and 
pages of reports.

Technologists who sometimes build reports but are generally 
responsible for implementing and administering the system. 
Given the different needs of each constituency and the different skill 
levels, successful enterprises have found that suppliers must offer 
the combination of a strong analytical engine and an equally 
proficient, and flexible, browser-based reporting facility.  Where a 
given supplier has a weakness in a specific area, successful user 
organizations have either lobbied for additional functionality or 
swapped in components from other suppliers. 
One of the most critical components for present and continued 
success is the strength of administrative facilities, particularly in 
automatically disseminating changes throughout the facilities, in 
applying deep security, and in scheduling the running of reports.
Data Mining
Successful data mining initiatives are generally led by the line of 
business, which typically enlists the support of information 
technologists.  In many instances sophisticated user organizations 
have in-house data mining experts that can facilitate a project and a 
search for suppliers.  Many of these user organizations are already 
doing a significant amount of mining; their goal is to either enrich 
their data mining arsenal, absorb new industry-specific content, 
and/or unburden themselves of having to continue catering to an in-
house systems 
Successful data mining organizations learn quickly that a thorough 
business case is essential — a prelude to finding the appropriate 
technology.  An established a cross-functional team creates this 
business case and measures the available technologies against this 
AberdeenGroup 49
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
need.  When looking for a supplier the success of the user 
organization is driven by:

Finding suppliers that have one or more algorithms that have 
been proven successful in the user organizations specific 
industry.

Selecting technologies that have been surrounded by relevant 
applications.

Engaging consulting organizations that have successfully 
implemented the applications in an industry-specific context

Making sure that the data mining technologies can leverage 
existing warehouses and that they can participate with other 
Data Knowledge tools in delivering meaningful, interpretable 
results to the user community.

Deciding if the business needs can be met, over both the short 
and long-term, by a tool that is based on sampling techniques or 
one that is capable of running against large data sets.

Choosing an underlying hardware and software system that is 
capable of scaling to large data sets, as well as speeding up 
typical data mining analyses.
Customer Relationship Management
As stated earlier, Customer Relationship Management has many 
affinities to data warehousing, and it can be viewed in a narrow 
sense as a data warehousing application.  However, if the user 
organization focuses CRM too narrowly on the data warehouse, the 
organization will fail to achieve its goal of getting closer to its 
customers.  Customers do not live, purchase, and communicate in 
the data warehouse; these activities are more accurately the 
province of seasoned SFA and Customer Support applications.  
Moreover, CRM is not simply an IT-centric project or the problem 
solely of the marketing department.  It is a technology that should 
affect the entire organization.  Enterprises trying to achieve CRM 
should consider the following observations. 

CRM success is directly related to getting the blessing of top-
executive management because of the potential benefits and 
upheaval to the organization.

User organizations fair better when they anticipate and 
embrace changes to business processes.

The organization must assess whether it is technologically and 
culturally ready to adopt CRM.  This assessment, usually 
AberdeenGroup  50
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
performed with the help of a specialist consultant, will help the 
organization decide to what degree it will bring CRM in house. 

The data warehouse-like steps followed in creating these 
systems must include a substantial amount of database 
scrubbing and householding to ensure an accurate 
understanding of the customer and the customer base.

Anticipate that the mainframe in many industries will continue 
to play a role in some CRM topologies.

Although service bureaus are not designed to weave a 
relationship marketing awareness into the user organization, 
they can continue to play a significant role for parts of an on-
going initiative.  With strong focus on helping launch 
relationship marketing campaigns off of mainframe data, they 
can be valuable resources for parts of the user organization’s 
strategy.  For many smaller and mid-size organizations, service 
bureaus and/or desktop tools can be the entire strategy.  
Moreover, these service bureau’s are beginning to reinvent 
themselves, particularly via Web-driven delivery mechanisms, 
making them increasingly attractive to the mid-sized 
enterprises. 

Full-scale CRM systems will demand that suppliers and 
integrators fully grasp the process and data flows involved in 
the multiple stages of customer treatment.  Aberdeen believes 
that, if the enterprise plans to get truly close to its customers, 
CRM systems must interact bi-directionally with the so-called 
touch points, including SFA and Customer Support applications. 
The Integration of Customer Interaction Software and DSS  
Few user organizations have been able to truly integrate DSS into CIS 
because the emergence of tools and guidance is only now occurring.  
Aberdeen interviews with user organizations that are implementing 
deeply integrated systems show that they have needed the assistance 
of a CIS supplier’s consulting organization.  This assistance has been 
needed for two purposes: to understand the nuances of 
multidimensional analysis techniques and, equally important, to 
reflect the numerous business questions that will need answering 
within multidimensional tools.  Users say that they anticipate 
needing:

To analyze not only customer-support applications but also 
complementary telemarketing, telesales, and SFA systems, 
AberdeenGroup 51
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
particularly the changes that a given business activity will 
cause in another activity.

To rethink many of the questions the users will submit via DSS.

To offer business users and executives their own summary and 
detail level access. 

To create systems that roll up each business activity to a 
summary level, expressed in a highly visual and therefore 
easily digestible manner. 

To run their CIS-environments as close to “lights out” as 
possible, counting on software agents to launch real-time 
indicators of business conditions, as well as the analytic 
component that will help put the condition into perspective.
Integrating Electronic Commerce And Data Knowledge
User organizations must understand that integrating Data 
Knowledge with EC requires a detailed understanding of the 
characteristics of Web interactions and the intersection between the 
Web and numerous components of the user organization’s existing 
applications.  The real challenge is to figure out which of the 
seemingly limitless customer data elements will translate into either 
incremental sales or increased retention.  To fulfill this mission, user 
organizations would be wise to: 

Identify the specific business processes they are trying to 
automate with EC.

Evaluate existing EC applications and tools on the market, 
including their data capture and processes capabilities. 

Look for software that is build upon standard RDBMSs. 

Evaluate third-party data capture and reporting tools for the 
Web. 

Design an applications portfolio and architecture that gives a 
compete picture of the customer and the customer’s web 
interactions. 
Integrating ERP and Data Knowledge 
Early integration efforts between ERP and Data Knowledge, typically 
include linking advanced query and reporting tools to the ERP 
applications or using the reporting facilities that are supplied by the 
ERP vendor.  Some enterprises gather and transform ERP data, 
blending it with other data mart and data warehouse information.  
Organizations lament the dearth of knowledge, never mind 
AberdeenGroup  52
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
solutions, that are capable of making ERP-DSS integration a near 
real-time event, and one that is wed to the specific nature of the user 
organization in a vertical-industry.  Nevertheless, because of the 
tricky underpinnings of ERP applications, successful users to date 
have found that:

Query and reporting tools containing templates that match the 
meta data tools to the ERP data/process model significantly 
lessen the burden of installation and step users through the 
search for the appropriate data that will answer queries.

In a data warehousing and data mart context, unless the user 
organization’s technicians thoroughly understand the ERP 
data/process model they are better off not creating 
transformation programs by hand.  Rather, they can turn to 
several transformation tools that contain pre-built 
transformations for more than one ERP supplier’s applications, 
and some of which are able to capture data changes.  These 
“changed-data capture” techniques reduce overhead on the ERP 
system and on transporting networks. 
AberdeenGroup 53
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Chapter Five
Supplier Abstracts
Arbor Software Corp.
1344 Crossman Ave. 
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
408-744-9500
www.arborsoft.com 
Market Position
At the core of Arbor’s success is Essbase, a multidimensional or OLAP 
server that the company has linked to many financial applications, 
including financial and budgeting analysis, and consolidation.  
Arbor’s Essbase is also the OLAP server used in conjunction with 
IBM’s DB2; the two create a hybrid ROLAP and MDB environment. 
Arbor supplements these core facilities, which can be used either in 
client-server configurations or on the Web, with numerous financial 
application modules, Executive Information Systems software 
(Wired for OLAP); and integration with spreadsheets and third-party 
access tools.  The company has numerous global channel 
partnerships, and world-class IT/Data warehousing expertise
Summary Observations
Arbor continues to refine the Essbase server with features that have 
increased the servers reliability and scalability.  The partitionable 
server is now able to support queries across two or more Essbase 
databases.  Users can analyze the summary data in Essbase and “drill 
through” to the detailed data stored in a data warehouse or OLTP 
system. 
Most notably, Arbor and Hyperion Software, have announced 
intentions to merge the two companies and aim their collective 
wares at taking a leadership position in supplying in custom, on-
demand, and packaged analytic applications.  The new company, 
called Hyperion Solutions, will target its applications at corporations, 
government agencies, and educational institutions.
AberdeenGroup  54
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Business Objects
2870 Zanker Road
San Jose, CA 95134
408-953-6000
www.businessobjects.com
Market Position
Business Objects continues to demonstrate a well-established pattern 
of innovation and success in Query/Reporting/Analysis and desktop 
data mining software.  Since its emergence in 1990 as a premier 
supplier of query and reporting software, Business Objects — both 
the company and its technologies — has been a leader to access 
information from corporate data stores. 
Summary Observations
The company is among the first to deliver and prove the value of 
giving business users a query and reporting tool that hides the 
complexities of the Structured Query Language (SQL).  The company 
most recently (July, 1998) announce WebIntelligence 2.0, which is 
aimed directly at supplying the power of query/reporting/ analysis 
software on the Web for enterprise and extra-enterprise users.  The 
software, which the company plans to deliver in Q3 1998, will shared 
the same infrastructure as BusinessObjects 4.1 for desktop 
query/reporting/analysis, thus streamlining administration and 
maintenance.
One key feature of WebIntelligence is the WebIntelligence Explorer, 
an on-line analytical processing module that allows browser-based 
users to access predefined reports, then drill into the reports for 
analysis,  and subsequently reach into the database for additional 
information.  In addition to numerous new reporting features, 
WebIntelligence includes profile-based reports, which allow 
administrators to create a single report, which different suppliers 
can be access to get individual views of information. 
Cognos 
3755 Riverside Drive
Ottawa, ON
K1G 4k9 CA
613-738-1440 
AberdeenGroup 55
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
www.cognos.com
Market Position
Cognos is a leader in the marketplace for business intelligence tools, 
specifically in the sector of query, reporting, and analysis software, 
and desktop data mining software.  The tight, resource-sharing 
linkage between the Cognos' client-server and Web-based 
Impromptu query and reporting tool, the PowerPlay 
multidimensional analysis environment, and the Scenario desktop-
only data mining software uniquely positions the company to give 
the enterprise -- and the extended enterprise - economical decision 
support in increments suited to the access patterns of a wide range 
of users.  Cognos has installed more than 700,000 seats of its 
Impromptu query and reporting software and its PowerPlay 
multidimensional analysis tool. 
Summary Observations
The Cognos architecture demonstrates the company's awareness that 
many users, particularly professional analysts, will continue to use 
"full client" versions of Cognos Impromptu, PowerPlay, or Scenario 
(a decision tree-based data mining tool that automates knowledge 
discovery).  These technologies can work either alone or in concert.  
Except for the currently desktop-only Scenario data mining tool, all 
of the software works as either a full-client desktop, on a standard 
browser, or mixed and matched to meet the analytic and reporting 
needs of various user populations of the enterprise.  In addition, the 
company also offers the Cognos Accelerator for SAP R/3, (OEMed 
from Acta Technologies) which extracts, transfomrs and loads R/3 
data into data warehouses, data marts or PowerPlay cubes.
Compaq 
P.O. Box 692000
Houston, TX 77269-2000
(281) 370-0670 
www.compaq.com
Market Position 
Compaq, its Tandem subsidiary, and its partners have built a 
comprehensive program that includes several, low-cost, turnkey data 
marts and enterprise-class applications.  Each of these deliverables 
not only significantly reduces the time and expense in planning, 
AberdeenGroup  56
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
deploying and operations, but also foreshadows Compaq's larger-
scale, in-the-works initiatives.  Compaq is now adding code and 
business logic to elevate the value of best-of-breed, third-party DSS 
applications.  Moreover, these packaged and/or integrated solutions, 
where appropriate, will be delivered ready-to-plug-and-run on 
Compaq's Windows NT/Intel-based servers for low-end to-mid-sized 
line-of-business applications.  Higher-end applications will use the 
ProLiant E2000 architecture as applications servers, and either 
ProLiant servers or the world-class parallel-scalable Himalaya 
processors for the data warehouse portion of the applications.  
(Compaq has yet to articulate the DSS role of the powerful 64-bit 
AlphaServers, acquired from Digital Equipment.) Compaq's 
Directional Consultants will individuate the application to satisfy 
particular needs of an enterprise. 
Summary Observations
Currently, Compaq has delivered Oracle’s Data Mart Suite, Oracle's 
CD-installable "data mart in a box," which contains all the 
components that a line of business would need to almost 
automatically create a query/reporting/analysis application.  The 
Oracle Data Mart Suite is pre-tested on a Compaq Proliant server.  
Compaq provides hardware recipes for different database sizes as 
well as numbers of users, resulting in the value-added ability for 
end-users to plug in the system, answer a few questions, and trigger 
the system — hardware, operating system, database, and application 
- to configure and tune itself.  Aberdeen anticipates that Compaq will 
soon roll out similar systems for ERP supplier SAP's much awaited 
Business Information Warehouse. In addition, Compaq offers two 
integrated, enterprise applications — credit card marketing and 
insurance-claims analysis.  Compaq’s credit card marketing and 
insurance-claims analysis applications embody the spirit of 
Compaq's fuller integration plans. 
IBM Corporation
One Old Orchard Road 
Armonk, NY 10504
(914) 765-1900
www.ibm.com
AberdeenGroup 57
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
Market Position
IBM holds the top-ranking position in the Data Knowledge 
marketplace based on the combined installed base in data 
warehousing hardware, software, and services.  Part of its success is 
its ability to serve as a single-source supplier for databases, 
transformation tools, and analytical and data mining software.
Summary Observations
Although IBM will continue to aim its expert consultants in 
warehousing and data mining at helping sophisticated enterprises to 
build complex business intelligence applications, IBM has developed 
near-turnkey applications, called DecisionEdge, for CRM.  This 
software applies Data Knowledge technologies — particularly 
ROLAP, data mining, and campaign management — at the finance 
and insurance industries and will soon target telecommunications 
and utilities industries.  IBM has also announced analysis suites for 
SAP and J.D Edwards ERP systems. 
Information Advantage Inc.
7905 Golden Triangle Drive
Eden Prairie, MN 55344
612-833-3700
www.infoadvan.com
Market Position
Since its recent announced intention to acquire IQ Software, 
Information Advantage has signaled its intention become a full 
service supplier of business intelligence software.  As one of the 
predominate suppliers of ROLAP software, Information Advantage 
has a large installed base among household name companies using 
its DecisionSuite and WebOLAP software.  Moreover it used by 
several information access suppliers as a tools for distributing views 
of information to suppliers. 
Summary Observations
As the Information Advantage absorbs I/Q Software’s products, 
which are well-known and used extensively for Enterprise 
Reporting, the company will have an arsenal that includes ROLAP, 
an object-oriented reporting environment, and query and reporting 
software.  Each environment can be used in client/server 
AberdeenGroup  58
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
environments as well as on the Web. The company plans and 
approximate two year effort to integrate all of its product across a 
common metadata backbone.
Informix Software Corp. (MetaCube) 
4100 Bohannon Drive
Menlo Park, CA 94025
650-926-6300
www.informix.com
Market Position
Informix MetaCube 4.0, a Relational OLAP environment that 
leverages the power and performance of the Informix Dynamic 
Scalable Architecture (DSA) by intelligently sharing critical and 
potentially resource intensive tasks between the RDBMS and the 
MetaCube Relational OLAP environment.  MetaCube 4.0 is designed 
to speedup Relational OLAP processing and integrate automated and 
semi-automated facilities that are specifically tuned to relieve IS 
administrators from the burden of managing these often big and 
rapidly changing environments — and within the context of a fully 
secure environment.
Summary Observations
Joint research and development at Informix has led to a Relational 
OLAP environment that is essentially part of the Informix parallel-
scalable RDBMS.  These databases have consistently shown 
superiority in highly respected transaction processing and decision-
support benchmarks such as TPC-D. 
MetaCube includes many innovations, particularly in dynamically 
building and selecting best-performance aggregations to satisfy a 
query.  MetaCube 4.0 will deliver considerable enhancements that 
streamline the architecture, knit MetaCube more closely with the 
Informix RDBMS, and enable different classes of users to obtain 
business-critical information, either in client-server configurations 
or over the Internet.  Moreover, the company has worked with 
Andyne Computing, Cognos, Business Objects, Seagate (Crystal 
Reports), and others to integrate each company’s leading 
query/reporting/analysis tools into the MetaCube environment.  
These tools, which will share a common metadata view of the 
AberdeenGroup 59
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
MetaCube environment, inherit the many benefits of the MetaCube-
database synthesis.
MicroStrategy Inc.
8000 Towers Crescent Drive
Vienna Virginia 22182
703-848-8600
www.strategy.com
Market Position
MicroStrategy is a leading supplier of ROLAP software that includes 
RDBMS device drivers to boost performance.  The company, which 
recently became public, is established in numerous household-name 
companies and installed at approximately 500 sites. 
Summary Observations
Its principle product, DSS Server, is tuned to exploit very large 
database technology.  Other modules in the DSS Server environment 
are designed to relieve the IS burden often involved in tuning the 
ROLAP to answer business queries— in managing the tradeoff 
between summary and detail data.  The company also uses caching 
techniques to speeds up its reporting environment.
Because of the breadth and depth of analyses DSS Server enables, the 
company has been selected as a tool of choice among information 
providers.  The strength of the DSS Server is behind DSS Broadcaster 
and StockMarket, two applications designed to “narrow cast” 
information into the paying hands of subscribers via the Web, e-
mail, pages, and other emerging devices. 
Naviant Technology Solutions
200 Four Falls Corporate Center
Suite 308
Conshohocken, PA
610-94-9851 
www.naviant.com
Market Position
Naviant Technologies Solutions. has applied its world-class data 
mining and decision support systems-integration skills to leverage 
world-class tools and deliver a pre-packaged customer relationship 
management system, called Navimark 1.0.  Leveraging software 
AberdeenGroup  60
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
templates — data models that embody best practices in the telco, 
insurance, and banking industries — Navimark envelops several 
arguably best-of-class technologies with software that enhances the 
individual components and the value of their interactions. 
Summary Observations
For data warehousing/decision support, Navimark leverages 
MicroStrategy DSS Agent's ROLAP environment; campaign 
management is based on Exchange Application's ValEX Marketing 
Management System; transformations are performed with Vmark's 
DataStage; for building Web-based applications, Navimark uses 
NetDynamics.  The package application includes other modules for 
such common database marketing practices as householding and 
matching names and addresses.
NCR Corporation
1700 S. Patterson Blvd
Dayton OH 45479
937-4454184
www.ncr.com
Market Position
As the reigning monarch in decision support, NCR has established 
Teradata as a leading database running on Unix, with plans to port 
the database to Windows NT and Sun Solaris.  Teradata uses a 
shared-nothing massively parallel architecture, which is deployable 
on MPP and symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) hardware.  The 
company has recently announced plans to strengthen the database 
in Teradata Release 3 with Teradata Structured Query Language 
extensions for OLAP and data mining, which are slated for delivery 
in late 1998.  In addition, the company’ deep institutional knowledge 
is reflected in its services and consulting organization, which applies 
data warehousing, data mining, and customer relationship 
marketing from a vertical-industry perspective. 
Summary Observations
The company leverages its database and consulting excellence with 
the NCR's WorldMark 4700 and 5150 Servers. A single-node 4700 is 
capable of excelling as a data mart or data warehouse as big as 100 
GB that can grow to as large as 600 GB in the same line.  Installations 
AberdeenGroup 61
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
growing beyond 600 GB will turn to the NCR 5150.  NCR is often 
among the performance leaders in Transaction Processing-C (TPC-C) 
and among the early leaders in the critical TPC-D benchmarks.   NCR 
prices now compare favorably to the leading Unix competitors.  
While alluring to small- and medium-size installations, the new 
prices are particularly enticing at the high-end, where NCR 
customers have to date paid top dollar for premium decision support 
functionality.  And the WorldMark servers are ready for growth.  
Leveraging common components and management facilities, the 
new servers can span seamlessly from a single node up to 128 nodes. 
Oracle Corp.
500 Oracle Parkway
Redwood Shores, CA 94065
(650) 506-7000 
www.oracle.com
Market Position
Oracle’s leading position in Data Knowledge, underscored by the 
recognition of the Oracle RDBMS’s prowess as the database of choice 
for data warehouses, extends as well to the Express 
multidimensional database.  These two core components are not 
only knitted together for the purposes of OLAP but are part of the 
company’s application strategy.  These applications include, for 
example, ERP, sales and marketing, financial applications, and sales 
force automation. 
Summary Observations
An example of the company’s technology and business savvy in Data 
Knowledge is clearly visible in the low-cost, CD-installable Oracle 
Data Mart Suite for NT, a turnkey system that eliminates most of the 
installation challenges that IS and line-of-business technologist’s 
would otherwise face when implementing a data mart.  This data 
mart package also includes Oracle’s hybrid of ROLAP and 
multidimensional database technology as well as Discover 3.1. ad 
hoc query and analysis tool.  Other facilities in the Oracle Data 
Knowledge arsenal include Oracle Reports, a production reporting 
facility for IS to develop and publish user views.  As with other 
Oracle decision-support software these environments are linked 
together.  For example, results from Express and/or Discoverer can 
AberdeenGroup  62
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
be published in Oracle Reports, while users can also move 
seamlessly between Oracle Express 6.2 and Oracle Discover 3.1.
The Oracle DBMS is able to excel in data warehousing because of its 
proven scalability and its numerous query optimization techniques.  
The types of optimization are based on several factors, including the 
type of query and available resources.  The databases complements 
its numerous join methods with parallel query technologies — for 
example scan, sorts, aggregations, grouping, and summary table 
creation — that are mandatory for data warehousing.  Moreover, 
these techniques absorb into the RDBMS what would otherwise 
require numerous queries, and additional IS labor to build 
applications that compensate for database weaknesses.
Platinum technology inc.
1815 S. Meyers Road 
Oakbrooke Terrace, IL 60181-5241
630-620-5000
www.platinum.com 
Market Position
Platinum offers a comprehensive suite of decision support/data 
warehouse software that ranges from query and reporting software 
to data movement and transformation tools.  Using its arsenal of 
software, the company has successfully created several Data 
Knowledge applications aimed at either a horizontal functions (e.g. 
sales and marketing analysis) or at a specific vertical industry (such 
as RiskAdvisor, a pre-built data warehouse for the insurance 
industry.) 
Summary Observations
Platinum applications have successfully minimized the effort 
normally required to plan and implement data warehouses and 
decision support environments.  RiskAdvisor, for example, includes 
an insurance-specific data model, structured applications and 
querying facilities.  The underlying data model and database schema 
and supportive analysis modules are aimed premiums and loss.  The 
premium modules are designed to help organizations improve 
performance and increase business volumes.  The loss modules are 
targeted at monitoring and analyzing claims processing, loss 
AberdeenGroup 63
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
patterns, and claims behavior.  The company’s InfoAdvisor, which is 
more horizontal in nature than RiskAdvisor, is aimed at sales and 
marketing analysis.  InfoAdvisor includes a data warehouse 
specifically geared toward sales and marketing, and is supported by 
facilities that transform data into summaries, trend analyses, and 
forecasts.  RiskAdivsor augments these core facilities with software 
that continuously monitors the environment and enables knowledge 
workers to proactively monitor the business according to numerous 
criteria.
SAS Institute Inc.
SAS Campus Dr.
Cary, NC  27513-2414
919-677-4444 
www.sas.com
Market Position
SAS is one of the leaders in Data Knowledge technologies, which 
include its data warehouse construction tools (the SAS/Warehouse 
Administrator); the SAS/EIS software, and object oriented 
environment for building EIS applications; CFO Vision for financial 
analysis applications, and Enterprise Miner, a data mining facility. 
Summary Observations
The company has had considerable success with its data 
warehousing technologies, driven principally by ease of use, meta 
data management, and the tight integration between, for example, 
data warehouse, data mining and OLAP.  Other leading suppliers in 
the data warehousing and customer relationship management have 
recognized SAS’ clout in Data Knowledge.  SAS Enterprise Miner — 
and its sample, explore, modify, model and assess (SEMMA) 
methodology — is considered the leading data mining environment 
in most third-party CRM systems and has recently supplanted many 
of these third-party suppliers’ data mining environments of choice. 
AberdeenGroup  64
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Other Suppliers 
Actuate Software Corp.
999 Baker Way, Suite 330
San Mateo, CA 94404
650-639-2000
www.actuate.com
Enterprise Reporting environment for building and deploying, and 
securing simple and complex, multivariable reports that run on the 
Web and/or client/server environment.  Includes an object-oriented 
development environment for creating and storing reports objects.
Applix Inc.
112 Turnpike Road
Westboro, MA 01581
508-870-0300
www.applix.com
Supplier of real-time OLAP software.
Brio Technology, Inc.
3950 Fabian Way, Suite 200
Palo Alto, CA 94303
650-856-8000
www.brio.com
Client/server and Web-based query/reporting/ analysis software used 
in many large household-name companies, with a particular 
strength in the depth of  OLAP analysis via the browser. 
Comshare
555 Briarwood circle
Ann Arbor, MI 48108
800-922-7979
www.comshare.com
Using third-party multidimensional databases, delivers performance 
analysis; as well as consolidation, reporting, financial analysis, 
budgeting, planning, management reporting; and sales analysis. 
CorVu Corporation
7901 Flying Cloud Drive
Eden Prairie, MN 55344-7903
612-944-7777
AberdeenGroup 65
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
www.corvu.com
Client/server, web-based query/reporting/analysis software that 
includes executive alters as well as applications for forecasting, 
impact analysis, and balanced scorecard. 
Dimensional Insight, Inc.
111 South Bedford St.
Burlingtojn, MA 01803
781-229-9111
www.dimins.com
Desktop, server, and Web-based multidimensional analysis and 
reporting software.
Exchange Applications
One Lincoln Plaza
89 South Street
Boston, MA 02111
617-737-2244
www.exapps.com
A leading provider of customer relationship management and 
database marketing software and services.  Integrates with RDBMSs 
and MDBs, and is used to monitor and coordinate customer 
campaigns. 
Gentia 
201 Edgewater Drive, Suite 241
Wakefield, MA 01880
781-224-0750
www.gentia.com
A multidimensional database server for web and client/server 
applications, includes a visual development environment, and an 
object request broker. These technologies serve as the underpinning 
for the company’s Renaissance balanced scorecard.
Hummingbird Communications, Ltd.
552 Princess Street
Kingston Ontario
Canada, K7L 1C7
www. humingbird.com
Query/reporting/analysis software that runs on the Web and in 
client/server configurations.
Infospace
AberdeenGroup  66
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
3130 La Selva, Suite 300
San Mateo, CA 94403
415-655-3700
www.infospace-inc.com 
Java-based query/reporting analysis software designed to work with 
RDBMSs and multidimensional databases.  Includes a security 
module to protect resources when the software is deployed on 
extranets. 
Pilot Software
One Canal Park
Cambridge MA, 02141
617-374-9400
www.pilotsw.com
A multidimensional server designed to support analytical processing 
in client/server and web configurations, contains embedded 
calculations for use in financial services, consumer package goods, 
telecommunications. healthcare, and retail
Redbrick Systems
485 Alberto Way
Los Gatos, CA 95032
408-399-3200
www.redbrick.com
Develops and markets a well-received RDBMS specifically designed 
for building data warehouse, data mart, data mining, OLAP, and 
database marketing applications that run on Unix or Windows NT.  
Also includes admistration facilities.
QueryObject Systems Corporation 
60 Charles Lindbergh Blvd.
Mitchell Field, NY 11553
516-228-8500
www.queryobject.com 
The QueryObject System is a mathematically formulated data mart, 
which adjusts its dimensions and content in response to a query and 
enables enterprises to create innovative DSS (with the power of data 
mining) applications. 
Seagate Software (Information Management Group)
1095 West Ponder St., 4th Floor
Vancouver, BC, CD V6E 2M6
AberdeenGroup 67
Data Knowledge Practice Summary 
604-6813435
www.seagatesoftware.com
Query/reporting/analysis software and multidimensional server that 
can run in client/server and Web configuration.  The query and 
reproting tools are linked to many other third-party supplier tools. 
AberdeenGroup  68
Data Knowledge Practice Summary
Aberdeen Group Retainer Services
This Practice Summary provides the foundation for the Aberdeen 
retainer service of the same name.
Aberdeen now offers annual retainer services with a variety of 
research and professional services tailored to specific client needs. 
The retainer services include:

A Practice Summary that encapsulates major market issues 
and trends;

Any other available major research reports discussing in 
detail topics specific to the research area;

Aberdeen Viewpoints subscription presenting Aberdeen 
analysts’ opinions on the market and business dynamics of 
current industry issues;

Aberdeen Profiles subscription presenting objective analyses 
of suppliers and their products and strategies;

Strategic inquiry service offering unlimited client interaction 
via telephone or e-mail with one or more Aberdeen analysts to 
discuss broad trends and issues; 

Quarterly briefings, interactive sessions in which Aberdeen 
analysts review market developments and provide 
recommendations on market strategy and messages;

Consulting on topics of the client’s choice for a specified 
number of person-days; 

An Aberdeen relationship manager assigned to properly 
tailor the service to the client’s individual needs.
Please see the inside of the back cover for a representation of 
Aberdeen’s research capabilities. For more information about 
Aberdeen’s retainer services contact:
Fred Abbott
Senior Vice President, Sales
Tel: (617) 854-5231
Email: abbott@aberdeen.com
 
AberdeenGroup 69
