Compaq Vows Support for Himalaya Post-HP
By Maria Trombly
Correspondents
The final results of the HP-Compaq merg¬≠
er vote may not be in for a couple of weeks,
but early results show it‚Äôs a go‚Äîand Com¬≠
paq has been working overtime to ease
customer minds about the integration.
Some 95 percent of the world‚Äôs securities
transactions go through Compaq Himalaya
mainframes, which power 106 of the world's
120 stock exchanges, the company said.
Compaq customers include some of the
largest Street firms, including J.D. Edwards,
Prudential Securities, and T.D. Waterhouse.
The company pledged that it will contin¬≠
ue to support existing product lines after the
merger. ‚ÄúWe‚Äôve already assured all of our cus¬≠
tomers, on every product front, that they
can count on our ongoing long-term sup¬≠
port,‚Äù said Compaq spokesman Arch Currid.
One of those customers is the Nasdaq
Stock Market. ‚ÄúOur CIO has been in discus¬≠
sions with Compaq and they have reassured
us that they will continue to support and
have direct investments in the Himalaya
line,‚Äù said Nasdaq spokesman Mike DeMeo.
HP officials wouldn‚Äôt comment on par¬≠
ticular product lines for this article, other
than to say that the merger would benefit
customers.
‚ÄúHP can certainly stand there and say
yes, we‚Äôre committed to the server, yes, we‚Äôll
keep it alive‚Äîbut who knows what will hap¬≠
pen?‚Äù asked Lance Travis, an analyst at AMR
Research. ‚ÄúAlthough HP doesn‚Äôt have any¬≠
thing directly to replace the Himalaya, there
is a risk that it will get shoved aside and
starved to death. I think it behooves people
to start looking for alternatives.‚Äù
In addition, he said, the merged com¬≠
pany will be spending next year reorga¬≠
nizing‚Äî-while competitors move ahead
with new products and services.
‚ÄúIf I were IBM or Dell, or someone else
they were allegedly going after, I‚Äôd be pret¬≠
ty happy right now that two competitors
of mine are going to be going through this
churn for the next 18 months,‚Äù Travis said.
But most customers aren't too worried,
according to two recent polls. About 70 per¬≠
cent of the of some 200 corporate users, in¬≠
cluding financial services firms, of HP and
Compaq equipment and services, told Hamp¬≠
ton, N.H.-based Technology Business Re¬≠
search last month that they were either pos¬≠
itive or neutral about the merger.
! Lindy Lesperance, the firm‚Äôs director of
research, broke the numbers out by industry
segment for Securities Industry News: 31 per¬≠
cent of 32 financial services firms were in
favor of the merger; 16 percent against, and
53 percent were undecided.
j The TBR results supported those re¬≠
leased in mid-March by Deloitte Consulting,
which did not break them down by industry.
According to the Deloitte survey, which
polled 2,354 HP and Compaq customers, 84
percent said the merger would improve or
maintain range and selection; 58 percent
said the merger would lower or maintain
costs; and 72 percent said the merger would
Improve or maintain the level of service.
In the TBR survey, respondents who
supported the merger saw it as providing
more resources for customers to choose
from. Some of those who were against the
merger said they were worried about the
future of Compaq‚Äôs products and services.
‚ÄúThere were concerns about how Compaq
equipment and contracts would be affect¬≠
ed,‚Äù Lesperance said.
/‚Ä¢pA
It‚Äôs the smaller customers who might
suffer the most, said analyst Peter Kast¬≠
ner, of Aberdeen Group. ‚ÄúThe top 500 com¬≠
bined customers of HP and Compaq
should continue to see very high levels of
sales and support,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúBut those
below the 500 who may have been higher
up in the pecking order of the smaller com¬≠
pany may see less support.‚Äù
For example, he said, a smaller firm may
see fewer visits from the direct sales force
or the loss of an onsite sales and support
office. ‚ÄúAnd the HP and Cojnpaq sales
forces will be combined and reshuffled‚Äî
it‚Äôs quite likely that at least some of the
people assigned to an account are likely
to be new over the next six months.‚Äù
Kastner recommends that IT organiza¬≠
tions at major financial firms plan on hold¬≠
ing information exchange meetings so that
the newly-assigned people can come up to
speed on the present and future needs of
that particular organization.
Compaq officials say that these con¬≠
cerns are overblown. ‚ÄúWe have completely
customer-focused priorities in terms of
the integration process," said Currid. ‚ÄúWe
are involving customers in some of those
decisions, such as who manages their ac¬≠
count, for example.‚Äù ‚ñÝ

