How to Represent Aberdeen and
Yourself”

August 2000

Four Key Objectives
* Establish and deliver a consistent,
positive message to represent Aberdeen
to prospects, clients, and industry
influencers

• Provide you with the confidence to
describe and demonstrate the benefits
Aberdeen can provide to a client

Four Key Objectives (continued)

• Understand the mechanics of following
up with a prospect to win assignments

• Describe a framework with which to work
with the press and PR firms to reach
potential clients

Agenda:
Critical Communication Times
• Introducing Aberdeen and yourself to a
supplier for the first time before being briefed
on its products, strategy, results, etc.
• Conducting yourself during a supplier briefing
and starting the Real Meeting
• Following up on a prospect’s request for
possible assistance
• Giving an interview to the press regarding your
analysis of a supplier and its most recent
announcement

Introducing Aberdeen and Yourself
To A Supplier

Your Supplier Audience
• Your target audience is supplier
executives who:
- Do not yet know Aberdeen, or

- What they do know about Aberdeen is from
intermediaries — their PR firm, press quote;
prospects, etc.

• Do not be surprised that even with all ou
quotes in the press that some senior
supplier executives will not have heard o
Aberdeen

Your Supplier Audience (continued)
- Even if they have heard about Aberdeen, they
will not know about our services or what we
can do for them

- We find that even most current clients do not
know the breadth of potential projects that
we could assist them with

- The same introductory message that is
appropriate for this audience can be modified
for IS decision makers, the press, recruits,
family, and people sitting next to you on
planes

j Your Objective
! • Describe Aberdeen in less than 5

j

minutes, without slides, to a relatively
unknowledgeable audience
- Key: the words and enthusiasm in your
voice

- Eventually, you must use your words
while maintaining a consistent theme with
all other Aberdeen members
- Consistency is required to build initial
trust between prospects and Aberdeen

Start By Broadening and Differentiating Aberdeen In
Comparison To Others
STATEMENT: Aberdeen’s mission is to analyze how

technology change impacts business. We have found
that traditional IT market research firms are caught up

in counting numbers or comparing promised future
features while management consulting firms really do
not understand the implications of new technologies.

Aberdeen focuses on the dynamics of business
change that will be created by technology change, y-v

PURPOSE: To describe how Aberdeen analysis goes
well beyond the procedural mechanics of typical IT
market research

Then Talk About the Matrix Approach to Sharing

Research Findings We Take

STATEMENT: At Aberdeen, we have numerous,
structured practice areas that match the research
needs of IS organizations. We follow trends in
systems platforms and architectures, networking and
telecommunications, network services (what many
call middleware), and enterprise business
applications. We then look at how professional
services are used to develop and deploy new
applications.

At this time, much of our research is focused on how
enterprise users will be transforming their information
infrastructures to take advantage of the benefits of
new Web-based technologies and products.

f Then Talk About the Matrix Approach to Sharing

j Research Findings We Take (continued)
$

STATEMENT (continued): Aberdeen’s unique value
; lies in examining the impacts and tradeoffs of these
? areas on each other and users’ business
1 operations.

| Analysts share findings from their practice areas
| with each other at Friday staff meetings to build an
| Aberdeen research consensus.

; PURPOSE: The purpose is to explain that we are a
t matrix research organization — not stovepiped

Now Move To The Focus Of How
i We Do Research
JjjM-SC7T3CS58STSB^X<*riTZXy«F7I‘£v.i.iLy,'?lS7V<T*t?X^~'':y«''

STATEMENT: Aberdeen’s research is concerned with
helping IS executives better plan for and operate the

business-critical data operations their enterprise rely
on to be successful — or even just survive. We focus

on areas of change. Specifically, how technology
change will create business change. We monitor

changes in IT technologies, analyze these changes,
and then interpret how these changes will positively or

negatively impact IS executives and their enterprises.
PURPOSE: Make the point that Aberdeen's research is
based upon the end-user’s perspective on change
Confidential

Spell Out For the Audience How We Help
Suppliers
STATEMENT: At Aberdeen, we enjoy being the bridge
between suppliers and profit-driven end users. By
understanding how enterprises operate and actually

plan for the future of their IS department, we are able to
help suppliers better leverage the market dynamics of
change as it is occurring. And we can explain to end­
user enterprise executives why their established and
potential suppliers are taking the actions they are.”
PURPOSE: You want to make your audience feel
comfortable talking with you. If you are the 6th out of 8
£ analyst groups they have spoken with, they might be a
5 bit hostile at this point!
<

Differentiate Aberdeen

Some More
STATEMENT: Unlike most market research firms, we

work on a 1-on-1 consulting basis with our clients. We
have a retainer service for our supplier clients, but do
not have a subscription publishing business requiring
us to write a note-a-week — no matter how irrelevant.
Rather, we review suppliers’ announcements, conduct
field research, compare the impact to current dynamics
in the marketplace, and provide feedback to our
clients. If the supplier is offering a unique capability
that end users need, we may publish our findings in a
Profile, Viewpoint, or Impact.”
PURPOSE: Sets the basis for having a dialogue about
how Aberdeen can help a client

Introduce Your Practice Area
STATEMENT: I personally follow the... market. The

group I am with is responsible for preparing Aberdeen’s
Practice Summary in this area. In this Report, we
identify the current key strategic questions and issues
of buyers and analyze market needs against the
universe of suppliers’ capabilities. Based upon my end­

user research, I am very much interested in how you are
... More to the point, I hope we can discuss the
following...
PURPOSE: You must show that you have a framework
upon which to analyze the supplier’s presentation ASAP
or you will not be credible
*

Canfidenfiai

Frequently Asked Questions
Q. How large is Aberdeen?

A. We have over 50 analysts on staff and are
growing *50% per year.
Q. Who are your major competitors?
A. We try to be unique by the strength of our 1-on-1
consulting and analytical capabilities. But we
are normally compared to Gartner, Meta,
Forrester, and IDC — though we rarely compete
directly against them for a client contract.

Confidential
AhnrrinonAnUD. Im

Frequently Asked Questions (continued)
Q. Where did the name Aberdeen come from?

A. When the company was started, the founders
wanted a name that implied that IT should be a
tool for business advantage — not just the
domain of the high priests of mainframe
computing technology. They did their market
research and found that the user community
understood these connotations from the name
Aberdeen Group.
But some of us believe it is merely that the
international connotation of Aberdeen and “Ab”
put us before other analyst groups in alphabetic
listings of market research suppliers.

I Frequently Asked Questions (continued)
Q. How long has Aberdeen been in business?
A. We were founded over 12 years ago.

1 Q. Why do Aberdeen analysts dress so formally

•
compared to other analysts ?
J A. Because we are also business people and
consultants. We believe that after all the
efforts you have made to prepare this
presentation and meet with us it is merely
common courtesy and respect that dictates
we should dress appropriately for our
meeting.
■ SEda 10, Chapta 2
“----------------------- —____________________________ _

CocfArtd

ZtwteenGrtXjp, Inc.

Frequently Asked Questions (continued)
Q. What is the ownership of Aberdeen?
A. We are privately held — primarily by three
partners (Logan, Wiilmott, Kastner) — and other
members of the organization. In addition, we
obtained private capital funding in 1998.
Q. Don’t other firms do what Aberdeen does?
A. Many organizations claim to do the type of IT
market research and consulting Aberdeen
provides, but we believe we have the best long­
term record in the industry for accuracy and
foresight.

Frequently Asked Questions (continued)
—■■■■. ....... 1-- --------- —1--Q, Can I have a brochure?
A. We have never used brochures — our business
conies from word-of-mouth. We often like to
joke that it takes an aggressive client to become
an Aberdeen customer. However, our web site
describes our research areas, provides much of
our past research, and contains the biographies
of our key analysts. This is our living brochure.
For a more in-depth description of our specific
services, I will ask one of our sales
representatives to contact you about a proposal
for your specific requirements.

And Now For Some Tips
•

Do not assume at introduction you know the
supplier’s business model and results — things are
rarely what they seem
- Patiently let the executives tell you their message

- Encourage them to talk by asking questions
- Do not blurt out your analysis of their company as
part of your introduction

•

Spend very little time describing your pre-Aberdeen
professional experience — they are conditioned to
see you as an Aberdeen representative
- Leave your pride in past accomplishments with
other employers at home

And Now For Some Tips: PR Firms
j • The supplier team you meet will typically include a
representative from a PR firm
- They get paid to schedule meetings with analysts like you

I
|
*
|

- They get to keep the client if you say nice things about
their client after the briefing session
- They may act as court reporters or take an active role in
the meeting
- Always treat the PR representative as another professional
helping the supplier and industry better understand each
other
• They will bring you more prospective clients
• They may recommend purchase of a Profile, etc.
- But they may believe you are stepping into their area in
terms of strategy recommendations and research they
would like to conduct for their client

And Now For Some Tips: The Hostile
Supplier Rep
• Many supplier executives have never worked
with analysts before — or have had bad past
experiences — and find the process
unpleasant. You will know as soon as you
shake hands.
• Try to relax them at the start by getting off the
subject at hand. Talk about family, hobbies,
travel, etc. Say something nice about their
company. Anything to ease the tension or it
will be a long and unproductive briefing!

And Now For Some Tips: The Hostile

...

....

Supplier Rep (continued)
• Your objective is to get them to trust you and the
services Aberdeen can provide

• Keep pointing out how Aberdeen is different from
other analyst firms

if

- A simple visual reinforcement of these differences is
the quality of our offices and the executive manner in
which you and other analysts are dressed and
groomed

• Be warned: Some, especially ex-sales
executives, may believe they are here to buy your
|
opinion

Modifications For Other Audiences

WHO: IS Decision Makers
STATEMENT: Aberdeen is very proud to have more
free research available on our web site than any
other IT market research firm. We get about 40,000
hits per month, mostly users. Check out our web
site.

WHO: Investment Community
STATEMENT: Yes, this is a very fast growing and
profitable business. We are still privately held but
are moving towards an IPO as soon as possible.

Modifications For Other Audiences

WHO: Analysts with other firms:
STATEMENT: We are more qualitatively and oneoff project oriented than you are. We really do not
compete with each other.

WHO: The Press
STATEMENT: We tend to deliver our research
findings and analysis in the form of 1-on-1
education for both supplier and end-user
enterprises.

Managing A Supplier Presentation

Why Supplier Briefings?
• The supplier wants to obtain positive industry
analyst reviews which will translate into positive
press reviews

j • These reviews will hopefully translate into both
customer acquisitions and securities analysts’
“Strong Buy” recommendations — increasing the
firm’s market valuation and the individual
employees net worth

• The supplier is fine-tuning their messages with you
for free before a major public launch
• You want to understand the supplier’s products and
strategies better than any other analyst in the
industry

Aberdeen Analysts’ Golden Rules
• Do not fall asleep!
- If you are bored, ask the supplier to move faster

- Reading ahead in a presentation is encouraged
so that you understand the flow and know
better where to ask the appropriate question

• You are in charge of the meeting!
- They asked you to give them 1-2 hours of your
valuable time — direct the flow of the meeting
as you wish
- And note that the most “power-dressed”
executive in the meeting gets the most respect

Aberdeen Analysts’ Golden Rules
(continued).............................

<; • Keep the session interactive
- If you disagree with a premise at the beginning,

say so
- If you believe the supplier is on the right track
;

|
gj

and has a valuable offering, say so
- Challenging and supporting are the most
frequent modes of commenting
- As often as possible, base your comments on an
opening line of “Aberdeen research shows ...”

O

- Please do not be condescending or arrogant — it
belittles Aberdeen and the client — this is an
executive-to-executive forum
Slide 30. Chapter 2

Cor^denfiaf
Abcrdeen&xxp, Inc.

Aberdeen Analysts’

Golden Rules (continued)
• If you do not understand what the supplier is
talking about or why...
- Begin with, “If I may ask a really naive question,
...” and then ask one!
- You may find that you and the supplier have
totally different opinions about the current state
of the marketplace

• Ask for an organizational chart of both the
company and the group you are meeting with —
you want to know where they fit into the
enterprise so you are not talking to a renegade
group that has misrepresented itself!

Aberdeen Analysts’
Golden Rules (continued)
• Ask at any time — beginning, middle, or
end of meeting — “What are the three
major points you want me to take away
from this meeting?”

• Kill the Message, Not the Messenger
- Do not assume the presenter prepared the
presentation. It may well have come from
misguided staff members, the PR person
sitting next to you, or another analyst firm.

! Aberdeen Analysts’
Golden Rules (continued)

I

- Politely, but pointedly, state the Aberdeen
view on the presentation contents — the
presenter may well be your target customer­
prospect if the presentation messages are
incorrect or incoherent!

§

- You are trying to help clarify the good points
the supplier is making or should be making,
while pointing out the potholes

S

- Avoid using the term “you” — meaning the
company — when giving negative comments
The presenter will take the criticism personally

Starting The Real Meeting
• After the executives have given you their
presentation, they will ask you what you think:
this begins the REAL MEETING
• Be objective, honest, and frank
- Never directly compare one supplier’s
presentation to its direct competitors’
- Analyze the messages from your composite IS
decision maker’s acquisition criteria
- Analyze from history the supplier’s ability to
deliver
- Analyze the competitive landscape from publicly
available sources

The Critical Juncture
————i—Bn—n— rnw m'H
Q: Did you provide the supplier with new insights?
b

Q: Were the supplier representatives interested in or
excited about what you had to say?
Q: Did they believe your instant analysis added
value to their understanding of their own
marketplace?

•

•

If the answer is “No” to all these questions, the
meeting is generally over — say, “Good-bye and

thanks”
If you think the supplier would be a “bad” client,

conclude the meeting

Concluding the Real Meeting
• If you believe the offering is valuable and will
be useful to end-users, discuss ways
Aberdeen could talk to the press and write a
Profile.

• The benefit of a Profile for the supplier would
be to expand, clarify, and communicate the
user-oriented messages based upon your
initial analysis
- Show samples of Profiles and offer to get
Aberdeen’s sales organization involved

Concluding the Real Meeting (continued)
• If you believe the supplier is going down
the wrong path and needs documented
market reactions to its value proposition
quickly, recommend a RAMP
* If you believe the supplier has lost touch
with or simply does not understand its
targeted prospects, an Aberdeen
consulting project may be the fastest and
mosteconomical way of getting it back on
track

Concluding the Meeting (continued)
• If you want to make the supplier a
customer, you must do so at the
conclusion of the Real Meeting
• No proposal — no matter how brilliant —
will win over a prospective client who
leaves the Real Meeting without an
interest in working withlyoiKmore in the
future
• Thank the executives for making the effort
to meet with you at Aberdeen

Concluding the Meeting (continued)
• Ensure them that your updated 1/2 page
Profile of them will be in the next version of
your Practice Summary Report
• This is different than a Profile project
• Send a contact sheet to the following
Aberdeen staff:
- Database specialist

- Inside and/or outside sales representative
- Your manager

- The Chief Research Officer

\nd Never... And Always...
• Never say or imply that Aberdeen will write a
positive article or give positive comments if
the supplier becomes an Aberdeen client —
that’s extortion!

• Never let the contractual side of our business
influence your industry analysis
• Always remember that timely, objective,
accurate analysis is the only wav to help our
clients and maintain our industry standing

Slide 40. Chapter 2

Confidential

Meeting Observations
• A productive meeting is conducted as a one-onone of peers. You and the most senior person in

the meeting must act like peers
- If you are not dressed and groomed like a senior
executive, you have already lost peer-credibility
• It is better to be overdressed than underdressed —
Aberdeen’s best clients have told us sol

• Aberdeen honors all non-disclosures (NDA) that
we enter into before a meeting — written or
verbal
- It is unacceptable to break an NDA
- Clarify the ground rules on talking to the press at the
supplier’s request before the NDA mrnirae

Meeting Observations

1

• If the supplier becomes very defensive about
an objection or issue you have raised to its
plans, simply say, “You have your opinion on
this subject, and we have ours, so let’s move
on”
• Relax and enjoy briefings — bantering and
occasional jokes are a helpful part of the
process

Confidential

Meeting Observations (continued)
• No two meetings are exactly the same — you will
learn how to conduct a supplier meeting through
practice
- Some can be hostile — especially when a supplier
misled Aberdeen in the past or does not like Aberdeen
press comments and how we have positioned it in the
past
- Some can be positive — especially when it is a client
that has benefited from Aberdeen’s assistance
- Some can be neutral — the supplier is looking for free
feedback and you are educating yourself

For
Assistance

If The Supplier Asks
For A Profile Proposal
■nrejadi nffr

.tAvK

T^rTM,-

J, i.ur.u>t ru

• Go to http://aberdeen2/intranet/ and
bring down the appropriate proposal
* Modify proposal as appropriate
t • Double-check to make sure the
prospect’s company name is correct
• Review proposal with your manager
I • Send proposal to the prospect and a
copy to Aberdeen sales

If The Supplier Asks

For A Profile Proposal (continued)
* Follow-up with a call to the prospect and
discuss by phone until you obtain a
verbal acceptance or rejection — let the
Sales Force help you
• When you receive a verbal acceptance,
follow-up with a confirmation letter to the
prospect-now-client

lf The Supplier Asks For A RAMP
and estimate how many person-days
Proposal

I

• Review the situation with your manager

If The Supplier Asks For A RAMP

Proposal (continued)
• Price the project at between $2,000$3,000 per person day
- You will never actually know how may
person-days are required as the client will
change the tasks and scope throughout
the project

• Review the proposal with your manager

• Send proposal to prospect and a copy
to Aberdeen sales

If The Supplier Asks For A RAMP
Proposal (continued)
• Follow-up with a call to the prospect
and discuss by phone until you obtain
a verbal acceptance or rejection — let
the Sales Force help you
• When you receive a verbal acceptance,
follow-up with a confirmation letter to
the prospect-now-client

You Believe the Client Could Benefit From Our
Strategic Retainer Service

• Meet with the appropriate person in the
Aberdeen sales force to learn their
experience with the prospect
* Decide who should be responsible for
following up with the prospect (you or
the sales representative)

• Have the appropriate Aberdeen person
prepare and send a Retainer Service
proposal and follow-up on a regular

You Believe the Client Could Benefit From Our
i Strategic Retainer Service (continued)

I • Do not be shy—this is appropriate
I follow-up for all positive supplier
I meetings
I • Contact the prospect once a month
I asking for new market information,

j
I

response to an industry announcement,
or opinion on your analysis of user trends

I • Arrange for meetings at trade shows —
keep in touch!

There Is A Request For Other Aberdeen

Services

* Suppliers may want or need (based upon
your suggestion) custom consulting,
product/strategy reviews, speeches as
part of marketing seminars, sales
training, etc.
• Work with your manager and craft a
proposed work plan/custom proposal

- Include as many Aberdeen analysts as
necessary

There Is A Request For
Other Aberdeen Services (continued)

* Send proposal to prospect and a copy to
Aberdeen sales
• Follow-up with a call to the prospect and
discuss by phone until you obtain a
I verbal acceptance or rejection — let the

Sales Force help you
• When you receive a verbal acceptance,
follow-up with a confirmation letter to the
prospect-now-client

You Simply Believe The Briefing
Is Important For Users
• Prepare a spec Profile or Impact
- You develop and publish it without any promise
on the part of the supplier to purchase reprints

- You follow Aberdeen’s standard research
methods

- You ask the supplier to review the final draft for
accuracy, but not to approve it for publication

• You or an Aberdeen sales rep send the supplier
our reprint and web rights pricing schedule

I You Simply Believe The Briefing Is
j Important For Users (continued)
i • Aberdeen prints it, provides it to our
1 clients, and puts an abstract of it on our

I

Web site

I • You inform the supplier it is now public
1
1

and we are very proud of it — but the
supplier does not have reproduction or

Web-linkage rights

• • Sales will follow-up on pricing for
2
reprints and Web rights.

The Thin Line In the Sand

• There is a thin line between when suppliers
are getting to know you/Aberdeen before
acquiring our services and when they are
looking for free advice on a continuous
basis
t
• This is a judgment call on your part when
the line has been crossed
I

The Thin Line In the Sand (continued)
t -twrJitJb

J

3-'r-'1 <?'r.‘7~.«.-?

There is nothing wrong with saying, “You

have been seeking my advice for 6 months.
We need to formalize this relationship in the
form of a Retainer service or another
Aberdeen product.”
• If the supplier acts as though we are a
government agency where services should
be dispensed for free, continue to take
briefings to educate yourself... but
feedback should now be minimal

The Thin Line In the Sand continued)
And now for a major issue, competitors and
suppliers (and their PR firms) who Aberdeen
has not lauded have and will continue to brand
us as a “pay-for-play” organization
- Yet our clients are very happy
• Our clients understand the value of the strategic
consulting advice we provide, our holistic view of the

industry and its changes, and our ability to simplify
complex issues for user
• Our clients understand there needs to be a bridge
between users and suppliers

- Your challenge is to never even give the
perception that Aberdeen is “pay-for-play”

Some Tips For Reaching Closure
MMMM——S^miEagHMiLMAJ

.n<

^Krr^y.’gr-gwr

• Call the prospect and PR firm and say,

“The press has been asking me about
your announcement and this is what I
have been telling them.”
- They will want the positive analysis to be
communicated to more than the few people
i

that read your edited quotes

Some Tips For Reaching Closure icontinued)

• Call your prospect at 3:00 PM on Friday
and say, “I am planning my schedule for
the next month and have limited time
left. Do you think I should schedule the
start of this project?”
• Call and say, “We both know we need to
do this project. Is there anything
Aberdeen can do to help you get it
started?”

Some Tips For Reaching Closure (continued)
• And the most powerful of all, continuously say,
“You have a fine product but your messages are
confusing and garbled. I do not believe IS
decision makers are hearing them — and when
they do hear your messages, they simply do not
understand them. Let us help you.”
• Most supplier marketing managers in
established companies have to work against too
many different political agendas to do an
excellent job — and they know it

Some Tips For Reaching Closure (continued)

* Start-up suppliers need to both educate
their most-likely prospects about their
product category and describe why their
solution is superior—and engineers are
ill-prepared to do this
- Both internal marketing people and outside
marketing advisors generally know that an
emerging supplier needs Aberdeen’s
assistance

Day Four of this training course will focus
much more on the long-term business
development process at Aberdeen

Stay tuned!

Talking To The Press

Why We Talk To The Press
• Gives Aberdeen a marketing voice as
an industry influencer

* Establishes your personal reputation
in the industry as an individual with
wisdom, insight, and influence
• Helps educate the market on
Aberdeen’s views
• Reporters can act as excellent
surrogate reviewers of your analysis

Why We Talk To The Press (continued)
• Excellent source of industry rumors and
mood
• Prospective buyers of Aberdeen
services frequently learn about us
through literature reviews
- The press is a virtual sales and marketing
channel that gives you personal credibility
instantly

MVe return phone calls to the press
- Analysts at many firms do not

• If we are under NDA on a subject, we tell the

reporter
- We honor NDAs. If the reporter aggressively seeks
NDA information, we simply discontinue the

conversation — we will not break the trust
relationship established by a verbal or written NDA.
- We can give background information on the supplier

and market conditions without breaking an NDA.

Aberdeen Press Style (continued)

• When necessary, we begin the interview
by giving background on the issue before
answering a specific question
- Many reporters need an education on the
subject matter they are reporting on

- Remember, they have a different topic every
week
- It builds your credibility with the reporter

Maerdeen Press Style(continued)
At some point you must move from

• The reporter needs quotes for

I

publication, not long-winded analysis.

Aberdeen Press Style (continued)
• Encourage the reporter to call you back with any

follow-up questions
• If a reporter asks if the company being discussed
is an Aberdeen client, simply state “Most
members of the IT supplier community are or
have been Aberdeen clients. I cannot comment
on our current relationship with this company.”

• The reporters are frequently looking for
Aberdeen bias — especially if your analysis and
theirs is different

The most popular press stories are very
short sound bites with limited analysis:
- Report the supplier’s announcement

- Quote a security or industry analyst’s opinion
- Quote a customer of the supplier about the

impact on their buying decisions

- Finish off with a quote or statement that
summarizes the reporter’s or editor’s opinion
• Note that the reporter is not allowed to
directly write his or her own opinion — that is

reserved for the editorial column

Managing The Story (continued)
—UBIII....... I !■

...........II 1'1

I

"----------TT~1-----1----------- ---------

• Every experienced Aberdeen analyst has been
“burned” by the press:
- You provide balanced, objective analysis and
background — both positive and negative —
only to see just the negative printed

- Your quotes are taken out of context
- Confidential background information obtained
from a client engagement is printed

- Editors change the reporter’s slant on a story
- Quotes attributed to you by reporters that you

cannot ever remember talking to

§ _Managing The Story (continued)
•

Tw—irnmiiin 111 nun i uh i i

'

i

ih

rx?• •':r.

So now, what do you want to tell the reporter after
providing educational background so the reporter will
understand the context of your quotable analysis?
- Many Aberdeen analysts are now only giving positive
comments if they believe the product announcement

I
|

I

is good for users
- Negative comments can be a wake-up call to a
supplier’s top management when product
management ignores your advice and warnings during

briefing sessions
• An objective but negative quote can act as the the catalyst to

.

scope out a potential Aberdeen project
♦ Or, it can potentially create a hostile atmosphere for your next
client meetinn

Press Tips

• The trade weeklies have a noon Thursday
deadline — expect calls on Wednesday
on any major topics in your area
- This is why product announcements are
typically on Tuesdays

- This is why you must respond promptly if
you want to influence or be in the story —
even if you are on the road traveling

(continued)
■———a—____

_______ _ ____ . . ~, • --*--'

M?zr'.-■ 7^ ■>■

• Some publications (Investors Business
Daily) do not like to quote individual
analysts or do so on a relatively rare
basis (Business Week) — but want your

educational background
• You will soon decide which reporters give
you a good return on your time and which
to limit interviews to less than 3 minutes

Press Tips (continued)

* E-mailing the press any published
Aberdeen material on a story vastly
increases your credibility
- Allow the press to quote you personally for
sound bites they would like to pull out of
your Aberdeen publication

* The press likes numbers, especially
future projections and supplier market
shares — provide them whenever
possible

