Information Technology                                                                  January 10, 2006


            For Mid-Size Enterprises, SOA’s Benefits Begin with IT
           Market Segment
 Mid-size enterprises are discovering the benefits of service-oriented architectures (SOA), but are
 more focused on using them to be more competitive and make their IT organizations more nimble.
 Meanwhile, large enterprises (at least $1 billion in annual revenues) place greater emphasis on
 business-IT alignment, although nimbler IT and improved competitiveness are also important.


           Benefits of SOA
 IT Payoffs Lead to Business Payoffs
 Service-oriented architecture (SOA) is being touted as the latest pill to cure the ills behind IT
 complexity in the organization, alignment of IT with the rest of the business, and IT spending
 discipline. Indeed, respondents to Aberdeen’s recent survey, detailed in The SOA in IT
 Benchmark Report (December 2005), cite these issues among their expectations from their SOA
 projects. However, Aberdeen believes companies cannot expect business benefits from SOA
 before the IT department has been able to ascertain what SOA can do for it.
 The reality for IT executives and CIOs is that the IT benefits from SOA must precede business
 benefits, which are a cascading effect of full-lifecycle SOA implementations. Companies that
 Aberdeen found as best in class in the survey (those whose practices are the best being employed
 and significantly superior to those of the industry norm) have more experience with SOA, and
 they found it lowers IT maintenance costs and enables more spending on innovation.
 The 70 mid-size organizations that responded to the Aberdeen survey appear to understand this,
 since they place less emphasis on alignment as a reason to implement an SOA compared with
 large organizations and more on such IT-centric issues as managing IT integration costs, and re-
 using applications via web services (Table 1).

 Table 1: Mid-Size Enterprises Stress IT over Business Benefits in SOA Drivers
 (Notable Differences in Boldface)
                                                            Large        Mid-Size          ALL
    Alignment with the business
                                                           50%            27%             37%
    Management of IT complexity
                                                           49%            39%             44%
    Application re-use via Web services                    40%            48%             43%
    Managing IT integration costs                          27%            29%             24%
                                                                    Source: AberdeenGroup, December 2005


                                    Click here to download a copy of Aberdeen’s The SOA in IT
        Announcement
                                    Benchmark Report.
                                                          For Mid-Size Enterprises, SOA Benefits Begin with IT
Sector Insight                                                                                         Page 2



 Companies must recognize that SOA’s primary goal is reducing IT costs through faster and
 easier customization, integration, and deployment of IT capabilities. The after-effect this has on
 the rest of the business is simple: a more competitive business environment that is able to change
 and react to market and customer needs without being constrained by IT limitations. For
 instance, companies that have had experience in the full-cycle of SOA implementations have
 been able to quantify the benefits of their undertakings in three major categories: (1) speed of
 deployment, (2) easier integration, and (3) faster customization and updates. These categories
 carry cost- and time-savings elements that will spread to the rest of the business. Here is a list of
 benefits SOA can deliver to both IT and the business:
 For IT:
   • Management of IT complexity
   • Re-use of applications
   • Speed of IT implementations
   • Lower IT integration costs
 For Business:
   • Faster reactions to change
   • Competitiveness
 For IT and Business:
   • Continuous alignment of IT and business
   • Lower overall cost of IT
   • Lower IT maintenance costs
   • Lifecycle visibility into business process management
   • Development of new IT-enabled capabilities
 Experience with SOA
 SOA is here, but not widely distributed. Only 16% of companies that responded to the survey
 have had more than 24 months of experience with SOA (17% in mid-size companies), and 15%
 have managed or completed at least three SOA-related projects (mid-size: 13%). So, in general,
 SOA investments are still lukewarm. One reason is that the psychology of IT spending is still
 oriented toward squeezing as much as possible from the IT budget. SOA requires an investment
 approach to realize its benefits, especially in some of the infrastructure-related parts of its
 deployment. But to secure the funding, the CIO in the mid-size enterprise must first deliver fully
 functional SOA applications to the business, then step up and play a marketing role to
 demonstrate the value of an SOA and counter the two chief challenges mid-size firms face in
 implementing one (Table 2).
 Table 2: Notable Challenges in Implementing an SOA
                                                                          Mid-Size         Large
                                                                          Enterprises      Enterprises
    Limited visibility for SOA value                                    42%               38%
    Limited vision/support or understanding from the business
                                                                        32%               35%
    side or executive leadership
                                                                      Source: AberdeenGroup, December 2005




© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc.                                                           Telephone: 617 723 7890
260 Franklin Street                                                                        Fax: 617 723 7897
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112                                                          www.aberdeen.com
                                                         For Mid-Size Enterprises, SOA Benefits Begin with IT
Sector Insight                                                                                        Page 3



 However, mid-size CIOs may have a few advantages ─ some owing to their companies’ relative
 size ─ to help them sell the rest of the enterprise on an SOA strategy:
   • Sufficient IT skills. Compared with large and small organizations, mid-size enterprises are
     less likely (24% vs. 40% for small firms and 36% for large firms) to have limited in-house IT
     skills to execute an SOA project.
   • Less IT complexity. Bigger may not necessarily be better. Only 18% of mid-size enterprises
     cite “too much complexity” as an SOA challenge vs. 26% for large companies (for small
     firms: 22%).
   • Best practices or lessons learned are easier to find. Again, simple may be a benefit; only
     23% cite a lack of best practices or lessons learned to call on, compared with 32% of large
     enterprises and 28% for small firms,
   • Change management is not a huge obstacle. Only 24% of mid-size respondents cited
     “change management around people or existing processes” as a challenge, compared with
     35% for large firms (for small firms, 29%). Again, being smaller has its advantages; having a
     corporate culture that is more adaptable to change is even better.
 Conclusions
 SOA adoption will lower the cost of IT and enable more responsiveness to business needs. The
 size of the SOA budget is at stake, and an enterprise must increase it to take full advantage of
 what SOA can offer.
                                               SOA Recommendations
 Because SOA is not widely deployed, it
 has not yet changed the IT delivery           √ Take a strategic approach to SOA planning.
 model. That must change so the IT             √ Invest in an SOA competency center.
 organization can take full advantage of
                                               √ Master the new SOA technologies.
 what SOA promises and create a
 “service-oriented IT organization,” which √ Develop SOA metrics.
 can define and deliver IT in terms of
 business services that line-of-business managers can understand. IT will need to decouple these
 business-level services from the IT-level services, but must be able to assemble them rapidly to
 deliver the required functionality.
 SOA is, first and foremost, a technology enabler for the IT organization. But it’s also a catalyst
 of change for how IT delivers its value to the business. CIOs are encouraged to focus on the
 following capabilities to begin effecting change within their organizations:
    •   Take a strategic approach to SOA planning. Multi-phased strategic projects may be more
        effective in raising the visibility of SOA within the organization at higher levels. CIOs
        must demand increased budget commitment to bring SOA’s promise to fruition. Take a
        holistic and strategic approach for SOA planning, which will include a roadmap, transition
        plans, and metrics for quantifying SOA’s value and results.
    •   Invest in an SOA competency center. SOA requires a concentration of knowledge and best
        practices that’s necessary to achieve effective deployments. Lessons learned from any SOA
        activity are best exploited when there is a centralized approach to its management.
    •   Master the new SOA technologies. There is a handful of key SOA technology pieces the
        IT organization must understand well. These include the enterprise service bus, the services
        registry, policy governance and management, SOA infrastructure activity monitoring,

© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc.                                                          Telephone: 617 723 7890
260 Franklin Street                                                                       Fax: 617 723 7897
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112                                                         www.aberdeen.com
                                                                             For Mid-Size Enterprises, SOA Benefits Begin with IT
Sector Insight                                                                                                                    Page 4



     •     business process management engines, master data management and semantics building,
           and Web Services/XML security management.
     •     Develop SOA metrics. There is nothing better for showcasing value than the measurement
           and documentation of specific outcomes. These could range from the obvious ─ cost,
           productivity, and time-to-market metrics ─to more SOA-specific measurements, such as re-
           use of a Web service, degree of services granularity (from fine to coarse), time to change a
           governance or usage policy, usage statistics for a given service, value of a service, and
           linkage of IT service to business service value.




                                                       Related Research
  The SOA in IT Benchmark Report, December                                        SOA Success Starts with IT Success,
  2005                                                                            November 2005
  The Service-Oriented Architecture in the Supply                                 The ESB in the Land of SOA, December
  Chain Benchmark Report, October 2005                                            2005


    Author: William Mougayar, VP & Service Director, Technology Practice,
    william.mougayar@aberdeen.com, and Rick Saia, Analyst/Editor, rick.saia@aberdeen.com



Founded in 1988, AberdeenGroup is the technology- driven research destination of choice for the global business executive.
AberdeenGroup has over 100,000 research members in over 36 countries around the world that both participate in and direct the most
comprehensive technology-driven value chain research in the market. Through its continued fact-based research, benchmarking, and
actionable analysis, AberdeenGroup offers global business and technology executives a unique mix of actionable research, KPIs, tools,
and services.
This document is the result of research performed by AberdeenGroup. AberdeenGroup believes its findings are objective and represent
the best analysis available at the time of publication. Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this publication are copyrighted by
AberdeenGroup, Inc. and may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior
written consent by AberdeenGroup, Inc.
