March 25, 1998
Mr. David A. Hood
Divisional Vice President Computer Associates International One CA Plaza
Islandia, NY
via Facsimile

Dear David,
Thanks for meeting us last week and outlining CA's requirements. As we have discussed by telephone, we believe that CA's needs will be best satisfied with three Aberdeen publications because our the audience diversity is too wide for one-size fits all.

Our project plan would require an on-site meeting in Islandia next week to reprise what was disclosed to us and to review Aberdeen's proposed outlines and the 'talking points' we would state in writing.

We propose three written communications:
a new vision/products/directions Strategy Profile aimed at CA's customers (4 pages; 20,000 reprints);
a Profile focused on the TNG Enterprise Editions outlining the what, why, and where best suited (4 pages; 20,000 reprints);
a Profile on CA's Unicenter TNG channel strategy (and Workgroup Edition) aimed at current and prospective channel partners, but also for use in CA World press kit inclusion with an audience of press, analysts, consultants, internal CA, and Wall Street. This audience wants to know why CA is strengthening its channel business and why Unicenter TNG and other announcements make for a compelling channel-partner business proposition (4 pages; 20,000 reprints).

As in the case of recent assignments we have had with CA, this proposal includes the following components:
- Aberdeen project research and consulting;
- Aberdeen-supplied reprints in the quantities indicated above;
- Electronic distribution license for unlimited, worldwide electronic distribution via the Internet, e-mail, or CD-ROM by CA through June 2000;
- Reproduction license to produce and distribute (but not to resell) unlimited paper reprint copies through June 2000 using Aberdeen's look and feel;
- Right to purchase additional reprints at sixty cents ($.60) each in order quantities exceeding 10,000 units;
- Electronic publication at Aberdeen's web site.

Our fees for the above work are $70,000 exclusive of reprint shipping charges and travel expenses to Islandia for CA-requested research meetings. Terms are Net 30 days from shipment by us.

We understand that time is of the essence. Accordingly, we propose to complete and publish the three Profiles for shipment on or before April 6, 1998, and (excepting an act of God) no later than April 13, 1998 in order to allow them to be on-site before the opening of CA World. In order to meet these aggressive schedules, we will need CA to pledge prompt review of our publications (probably on or before March 31st).

With warm regards,
Peter S. Kastner
Executive Vice President
