AberdeenGroup








Point Solutions Versus
Integrated Oracle
Applications:
The Road to IT 
Investment ROI


An Executive White Paper
June 2001




Aberdeen Group, Inc.
One Boston Place
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 USA
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
www.aberdeen.com


Point Solutions Versus Integrated Oracle Applications: The Road to IT Investment ROI
Preface
Integrating software has long been the bane of corporate Information Technology (IT) departments.  Aberdeen research indicates that the percentage of enterprise IT budget committed to application integration is, on average, 40% — and may rise to as much as 70% in certain situations. 
Over recent months, there have been numerous articles in the trade press detailing the pitfalls of large-scale application integration projects.  Perhaps the most dramatic one in the last six months was Nike, which cited failings in integration of three major vendors’ solutions — SAP’s enterprise application, Siebel’s Customer Relationship Management (CRM) application, and i2’s Supply Chain Management (SCM) offering — as the cause of missed quarterly earnings.  That integration initiative was reported to be a four-year, $400 million endeavor.  The problems were not attributable to any of the software applications themselves, but rather to the difficulties of integrating them with the core enterprise software and the software of the hundreds of suppliers at the dispersed ends of the manufacturing supply chain.
It is no surprise, therefore, that today’s corporate executives are facing mission-critical decisions in selecting the software that runs their enterprises.  These decisions frequently define the quality of the business processes that are the heart of the enterprise, and they have the potential to create competitive advantage — or, in the case of Nike, disadvantage.  Executive IT decision-making must consider both tactical and strategic concerns.  Most enterprises with any real operating history have heterogeneous environments — based on hardware and software from multiple vendors and reflecting incremental decisions over time.
In the early 1990s, integrated enterprise application suites from major software developers — Baan, Oracle, PeopleSoft, SAP AG, and others — largely triumphed over point or stand-alone solutions.  New e-Business application vendors emerged during the latter years of the decade with single-function solutions, re-creating the moniker “Best of Breed.”  Examples include Ariba and Commerce One in 
e-Procurement, Broadvision and Siebel Systems in CRM, i2 and Manugistics in SCM, and the plethora of other single-function solutions.  Many of these applications were “first to market” and generated much attention in the height of the Internet gold rush — i.e., their “fifteen minutes of fame.”  The issue for business decision-makers was whether to integrate these new stand-alone applications — or wait for (and trust) the already integrated equivalent in their vendor’s infrastructure solutions.
This Aberdeen Executive White Paper explores the ramifications of integrating disparate software point solutions in the enterprise and contrasts it to the alternative strategy — purchasing the vast majority of business software from a single vendor.  The paper also reviews the technical, competitive, and economic implications of such decisions over time.  Aberdeen gathered the data for this research through interviews with a dozen IT professionals at selected large and midsize North American companies, using varying combinations of integrated enterprise and point solutions.  Their input led to the conclusions herein.
Executive Summary
Ultimately, the question of point solutions versus an integrated suite comes down to trade-offs between strategic and tactical objectives.  Deriving a strategic plan for total Business Process Reengineering (BPR) is a tremendous challenge.  Thus, the tactical option, a point solution —perhaps a more controllable project — is perceived to increase short-term realization of benefits and decrease risk.  In fact, it may lead to a protracted return on investment (ROI).  The issue for many enterprises over the past six years — which drove many of them to acquire point solutions — was a perception of immediate need for competitive advantage.  Concomitantly, enterprises sought the holy grail of fast ROI, seeking dramatic results in a short time frame — with complete implementation measured in months, not years.  This perception was driven by fear — specifically, a belief that New Economy Darwinism would ensue if they were too slow to react. 
That perception is central to the issues discussed in this Aberdeen White Paper.  Is there a competitive advantage in being an adopter of single-function software, or does the cost of implementation and integration outweigh the short-term effect of the software as a critical business differentiator?  Will a business suffer more from not having this software immediately than if it waits until an enterprise vendor makes it available?   The decision to adopt “Best of Breed” point solutions versus focusing IT investment resources on an integrated product suite from a single vendor is one of the most strategic decisions facing an enterprise.  The results of such a business decision are technical, competitive, and economic. 
The Search for Durable Advantage
Michael Porter recently commented on this subject with a strong vote for integrated suites:  “Today, nearly every company is developing similar types of Internet applications, often drawing on generic packages offered by third-party developers.  The resulting improvements in operational effectiveness will be broadly shared, as companies converge on the same applications with the same benefits.  Very rarely will individual companies be able to gain durable advantages from the deployment of “best-of-breed” applications.”1 
Point solutions offer the promise of leading-edge business process functionality and faster implementation.  But are these benefits both real and enduring?  Adopting point solutions requires the enterprise to either accept the muted benefits of limited (and limiting) business process integration or pay the price to forge the data and process integration needed to optimize the point solution investment. 
The fiscal concerns in evaluating the integration of multiple applications include: 
    • Initial product purchase and implementation. 
    • Integration of the application with one or more other applications across the enterprise. 
    • Ongoing upkeep of the points of integration and data fields as the products change over time. 
    • Issues of timing:  In a multi-application environment, new releases and patches appear sporadically, adversely affecting the ability to plan upgrades strategically. 
    • Cost of user training and retraining on multiple interfaces. 
Integration:  The Business Effects
It is generally easier and quicker to implement new business process automation functionality from a company’s existing enterprise software supplier into the previously implemented enterprise infrastructure than it is to append that functionality through a new third-party vendor.  However, the major integrated software solution vendors — Baan, JD Edwards, Lawson, Oracle, PeopleSoft, SAP, et al. — generally are slower to the dance than their third-party, single-product counterparts.  The reason is simple:  The integration of this new functionality into the complex business processes already supported takes time and is more complex than delivering a stand-alone system. 
Aberdeen research has observed, on average, a two- to three-year lag between the appearance of stand-alone, third-party applications supporting new business processes and the delivery of similar functionality by the integrated enterprise application suite vendors.  These releases are usually less mature than their third-party competitors, and it often takes up to three years for the integrated software vendors to get to functional parity with the point solution vendors.  But when the integrated solution vendor’s applications finally “arrive,” they generally have higher levels of business process integration, and, as a result, a higher potential benefit stream. 
For business management, this is a complicated ROI analysis that must evaluate and effectively gauge the level of benefits and costs for each option and then discount them for time-to-benefit, cost distribution over time, and the risk associated with each option.  
In summary, difficult integration follows early adoption of a recent market entrant; easier integration stems from a product created in the context of an enterprise suite that may be slightly later to market.  Clearly, once the enterprise vendor offers the same solution as the point product supplier, integration of the solution into the production environment is both faster and easier, delivering a more rapid ROI.
Figure 1 demonstrates the gap between expectations and actual return — the cumulative benefit stream — on the average application investment over time when impacted by integration.  It also illustrates the effect on the amount of time to the breakeven point for the initial investment.  Companies interviewed for this study revealed higher expectations than they perceived in benefits received; they also had not anticipated the true costs of integration over time. 
Another business issue to be considered is the premise that competitive advantage can be derived from software decisions.  Aberdeen research suggests that there is a degree of truth in this hypothesis, but it is overly simplistic.  Some of the companies interviewed as part of our research revealed that their competitive edge derived from custom applications that attack the heart of their business strategy in their specific market.  These applications, admittedly, are expensive to develop, requiring skilled developers who must be retained to support and maintain the code over time.  These applications are not commercial point solutions nor are they reasonable additions to an enterprise vendor’s solution.  

Figure 1:  Hidden Cost Effects of Integration on Cumulative Benefit Stream

Source:  Aberdeen Group, June 2001

On the other hand, Oracle Applications, the core applications of the enterprise — indeed an area expanding in breadth — may be considered the baseline for competing in today’s marketplace.  The marketplace is defined by collaborative, Web-adept, e-Commerce applications as well as supplier, employee, and customer relationship solutions.  The core applications provide the greatest value when used in full to provide the infrastructure for the business; they are most efficiently used as is, configured for each customer.
Given one dollar spent on the initial software purchase (Figure 2), with fairly consistent implementation costs on a one-to-one ratio, the cost of integration rises with the number of points of integration — i.e., the number of connection points between the various single applications.  The graph demonstrates a longer time for implementation of the enterprise environment; a consistent cost and time to implement and integrate with solely one point solution (typically a single departmental solution, though its use may spread); and the exponential — not additive — time spent on integration with both three and four point solutions.  The time variations may span 18 to 24 months to implement an entire integrated enterprise suite; 3 to 6 months for one point solution; and up to 16 to 20 months to integrate four point applications — although in this case, the time may surpass the duration required to implement an entire ERP solution.
Figure 2:  Comparative Cost of Implementing Integrated Suite Solution vs. Integrated Point Solutions (per $1 of Software Expenditure)

Source:  Aberdeen Group, June 2001
Managing the Risk of Integration
In a multi-vendor environment, it is often the IT staff member’s responsibility to manage one or more relationships with the respective software suppliers.  IT directors report that such vendor management is a unique skill, not typically found among the IT staff.  Yet the successful vendor management task — especially over time — is seldom considered as part of the decision to incorporate a plethora of vendors’ products in a single enterprise environment. 
Point solution providers who partner can provide some comfort to buyers, but that comfort can be fleeting.  SCM and e-Procurement suppliers, as one “best-of-breed” example, partnered to provided seamlessly integrated solutions — often in relationships that lasted less than a year and frequently left customers hanging.  
(A case in point is the Ariba, i2, and IBM partnership, launched with a million dollar ad campaign and dissolved less than six months later.)  Thus, these customers face unpredictable costs two years after the buying decision and the initial implementation. 
Many of the executives we interviewed noted having an underlying infrastructure of a single vendor’s suite of business applications.  The companies ranged from midsize to large — with IT staffs ranging from 7 to 1,500.  The majority of the companies had in common the desire to simplify the IT environment; and, though all had some integration and customization needs, the midsize companies in particular sought to keep such projects to a minimum.  Larger companies such as Beneficial Life, an Oracle Applications customer, had legacy systems with homegrown software solutions that had been in place for years.  In contrast, mid-market company Indian Motorcycle had implemented an Oracle suite of applications in 1999 to run the entire business.  The company reported realizing the ROI for that application investment within a year of going into production with the software.
Cost comparisons over time are the telling data points for determining the effects of integrating multiple third-party applications.  Looking at the benefits obtained from implementing applications in relation to time can provide a view into the costs of both delay and integration.  Figure 3 shows the payback from a typical project where applications are integrated.  At the beginning of a project, before the application is in use, the organization incurs costs related to the initial software purchase, and implementation and integration.  Once implementation and integration are complete, the organization begins to accumulate benefits and at some time the breakeven point is, in theory, reached.  The maintenance of the integration points created by revisions by the point solution supplier causes additional costs, reducing the benefit stream temporarily.  In some instances, the time needed for a positive ROI can take many months — typically years.
Figure 4 depicts the contrast between the two strategies.  It exemplifies the decision to add new functionality via a third-party point solution as opposed to adding the same functionality through an integrated module of the existing infrastructure suite.  By eliminating the need for significant integration and by reducing implementation costs, the time to reach breakeven and a positive benefit stream can be reduced.  With functional parity between the point product and the module, the time to benefit within the organization is reduced.  An early implementation of the integrated module could cause the accumulation of benefits (the slope of the line) to be steeper.  Not only is the time to breakeven reduced, but the organization also accumulates more benefits.  
The area between the solid line and the dashed line in Figure 4 denotes that additional benefit achieved by avoiding integration time and costs.  For example, with all things being equal in product functionality between a suite provider’s integrated solution and a third-party provider’s point solution, the benefit return on the integrated application is both greater and more rapidly achieved.
Integration delays initial arrival at breakeven; it also has an iteratively negative effect with repeated re-integration over time.  The effect on time to net benefit can be significant.
Figure 3:  Time to Benefit for a Point Solution

Source:  Aberdeen Group, June 2001
Vendor Requirements
An integrated solution places specific requirements on the suppliers of such software.  All of the various applications need to rely on the same data models to ensure that data can be entered once and be distributed to all parts of the integrated whole that use that data.  Thus, a customer identification number remains the same through the Sales Force Automation (SFA), CRM, order entry, billing, support, and service modules of the enterprise application suite.  And the identification tracks the same individual consistently, everywhere within the system.  For example, if a customer is an employee and also a prospect for another product set, the software has to be able to coalesce these varying identities to one person and one tracking number throughout the system. 
Aberdeen research indicates that, assuming similar reasonable levels of business process integration, a point solution generally requires an initial integration investment equal to three to four times the value of the license fees to reach an equivalent level of integration.  There are numerous instances of ERP implemen-
Figure 4:  Adding an ERP Module to the Existing Solution vs. Adding
a New Point Solution 

Source:  Aberdeen Group, June 2001
tations in which implementation and integration combined has risen to as high as 10 times the license fee.  Our research indicates this figure drops to a factor of one for implementation of a new application delivered as part of an integrated suite.  
Some customers may be satisfied with a lesser degree or more superficial level of integration.  They do not fully integrate their point solutions, so as not to incur the cost — nor derive the benefits — of fully integrated point solutions.
Beneficial Life reported that more than 50% of its IT staff is involved in new product customization, including integration; however, when there is a very close match between the product to be integrated — the same data models, application programming interfaces (APIs), and a close fit with the architecture — the cost of integration is very close to the same as the cost of the software.  When the third-party software is distinctly different from a company’s architecture, IT staff sees the integration cost as two to three times the cost of the software.  
The Technical Challenges to Integrating Point Solutions
If the nirvana of plug-and-play were realized today, integration clearly would not be an issue.  Past software development efforts have incorporated standards, de facto and de jure, to attempt compatibility and interoperability.  But the dream of interoperability based on consistent standards for object-oriented software components has proved to be Quixotic (Table 1).  Aberdeen research shows that componentization of business applications can still play a critical role in delivering enterprise-architecture flexibility and cost effectiveness.  
Business process and function integration are addressed in part by OOT (object oriented technology).  OOT has had a slow take-off, but when applied to enterprise applications it has shown significant benefits.  As a basis for componentization of large, often monolithic applications, the objectifying of business practices combined with standard object communication technology will lead to certain advantages for easing integration at the component or business process level.  
In addition, standards bodies are now addressing data compatibility issues.  The current notable efforts on standardization of the eXtensible Markup Language (XML) are perhaps the most positive movements afoot to enhance ease of information sharing across collaborative enterprises.  Organizations like RosettaNet and the Open Applications Group, Inc. (OAGI) are making important strides, ascribed to by the major software vendors such as Microsoft, Oracle, SAP, and many others.  These standards will prove invaluable to future ease of product integration. 
However, this is not the world of business applications today.  Products as developed across vendors are idiosyncratic — seeking competitiveness not in compatibility or interoperability, but in differentiation.  And, for many, this differentiation comes at a cost to the corporation.  

Table 1: Issues and Pitfalls of Third-Party Integration 
For IT	Inconsistent software installation and upgrade procedures across disparate products 
Costly external and internal consultants for integration efforts 
Ongoing maintenance of the integration solution (time, staff skills) 
Uncoordinated development agendas and varied development cycles from various vendors, 
resulting in varied release schedules 
Multiplicity of skills required to develop, deploy, and support multiple applications and their 
various architectures
Maintaining global operations means that problems multiply
Multiple databases, operating systems, and server types may have to be maintained
For the User	Disparate user interfaces increase training time, decrease ease-of-use over multiple applications 
Inability to consistently retrieve data from multiple applications 
Incompatible product workflows can disrupt business practices 
No 360-degree view of customer 
No global view of information 
Inconsistent data
For Vendor 
Managers	Project management issues stemming from multi-vendor contacts 
Lack of vendor accountability can lead to finger-pointing as issues arise 
The point solution suppliers’ partnering relationships may fail 
Multiple points of contact for support — with no defined escalation process
Bug fixes, unplanned upgrades, unsuspected incompatibilities all can lead to production delays
For the 
Business	Recurring high costs of spot solutions’ licenses and maintenance 
Recurring cost of product(s) integration 
Potential protracted time to ROI
Potential adverse effects to the business from misaligned or incompletely integrated solutions
Unpredictable TCO over time
Source:  Aberdeen Group, June 2001
The technical aspects are varied — requiring different points of integration to be evaluated for each product under consideration.  Aberdeen research suggests that the following are primary issues for corporations in considering software integration across various vendors:
    • Variation in data models among discrete products;
    • Incompatibilities in workflow and internal communication techniques across multiple products;
    • Discrete development and delivery cycles of the separate applications; upgrade and patching issue stemming from separate software release 
cycles;
    • Cross-product business process integration; and
    • The lack of standard open and persistent interfaces. 
Variation in Data Models Among Discrete Products
Point applications may adopt different data models for what, in reality, are common data objects.  For example, a customer ID might vary between a sales order entry system, a purchasing system, a Web store, and a call center — the result of multiple underlying applications with parallel data entry processes that create customer records with different formats and contents.  With two unique customer IDs, and a customer name, for example, “3M” in the order entry system and “Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing” in the purchasing system, it is real work to integrate the data or the processes controlled by the individual systems.  And the business value of maintaining consistent data cannot be understated; today, companies spend a great deal trying to get data right.  Integrated enterprise application suites that rely on single data models address this issue completely.
Incompatibilities in Workflow and Internal Communication Techniques
Communication must be seamless across a total business process.  However, if multiple business applications are amalgamated to try to accomplish the process as a whole, problems can emerge.  Automated workflow, which dispatches information, transactions, or items requiring approval according to a prescribed path, must transparently communicate with the activity that constitutes the next step in that path.  The lack of a standard message passing among disparate applications within a distributed enterprise thus causes yet another integration issue.  An integrated enterprise solution, on the other hand, checks that the message formats are consistent to ensure message transport and receipt.  
Discrete Development and Delivery Cycles of the Separate Applications
Development cycles — and the release of software updates — vary from vendor to vendor.  The installation of new software versions frequently creates a requirement for incremental integration investment in maintenance that spans the life of the application(s).  The cycle for IT becomes not just constant new installations, but more significantly persistent patching, forced upgrades, frequent re-integration, testing, and validation with each system change.  
Cross-Product Business Process Integration
Business processes rely on the smooth flow of information and transactions throughout the organization — and across organizations to customers and trading partners.  For example, in the order-to-cash cycle, the business process from Web-based order entry flows through the organization:  checking inventory, ascertaining product location, picking the product in the warehouse, shipping, billing, and eventually receipt of payment and entry in the general ledger.  An inability of a product to “talk” to another in this business flow can bring the process to a halt — which can affect customer satisfaction and revenue recognition.  The level of business process integration serves to magnify or deflate the realization of benefit streams and, ultimately, the ROI of an application.  
However, business process reengineering is itself a significant challenge.  One of the principal arguments for point solutions, one that has significant validity, is the less ambitious scope of the project — which may mute ROI but accelerate the short-term realization of benefits and reduce the business process reengineering risks inherent in a large scale, integrated software product family implementation.  Recognition of this factor has led businesses implementing enterprisewide applications to avoid the “big bang” theory of implementations in favor of phased, more controllable, application-by-application and site-by-site rollouts.
Lack of Standard Open and Persistent Interfaces
The major collaborative enterprise application vendors supply their customers with toolboxes to assist IT in adapting or integrating to their product sets.  Each toolbox is different.  Some products have open APIs; some are “less than open.”  And the interface to the product may change at the whim of the supplier — requiring new tools, new procedures, and new training of IT personnel.  As the industry progresses, albeit slowly, toward developing standards, there is hope of long-term standardization and consistency.  Until then, this issue haunts those who would customize applications or build complex, multi-application environments.
As corporations integrate additional technologies into their infrastructure, e.g., relationship management, intellectual property management, or e-Business applications, an ongoing effect occurs on integration time over the long term, varying by the fit with that infrastructure.  The integration of multiple applications is more than a one-time investment. It is a continual effort over time that exceeds that of the addition of a new module into the infrastructure (Figure 5).  The initial lag in application introduction speaks to the time lapse between the single point solution’s availability and the availability of the new, already integrated application.
The bottom line, as it were, is in the perceived competitive advantage derived from the functions of the single point applications — again, possibly available on the market earlier — when compared to the integrated suite of applications over time (Figure 6).  The immediate ability to leverage new functionality with the first revision of a new-to-market point solution dissipates over time as the vendor of an integrated application suite catches up and reaches parity.
The bandwagon effect toward hot new applications is just that:  The rapid dissipation of advantage drops precipitously as others adopt the application, thereby flattening the perceived competitive value to be derived.

Figure 5:  Integrating to the Infrastructure — Effort of Point Solutions
vs. Additional Suite Modules over Time 


Source: Aberdeen Group, June 2001
Figure 6:  Advantage Dissipation over Time

Source:  Aberdeen Group, June 2001

Aberdeen Conclusions
Today’s businesses need to assess the strategic and tactical trade-offs in enterprise solutions carefully.  Functionality clearly is the driving concern — a solution has to address the mission-critical requirements of the business.  However, selecting that functionality from a point solution package as opposed to an integrated application provider like Oracle often accounts for the added cost, difficulty, and long-term efforts required of IT departments.  And for core business processes, which do not provide the differentiators or the competitive edge of a business, that effort of integrating does not necessarily pay off when compared to already integrated business solutions.
The issue at hand, as Michael Porter states, is the inability to sustain a durable competitive advantage from a software application over time.  Of late, point solutions addressed the market fear of being left behind in the New Economy, a fear that has proved unrealized.  These products were often an “e” version of a single current enterprise function (e-Procurement, for example) or a new function, such as a Web store interface.  Though early to market, these products, when proved viable in the marketplace, were replicated — and in many cases improved — in the integrated enterprise application.  Users’ testimony indicates that the cost of implementation and integration does not justify the potential short-term effect of the point product as a critical business differentiator.  
The future holds the promise of eased application integration through OOT and adherence to XML standards, supported by the major suppliers.  Aberdeen concludes that, at this point in time, the highest degree of integration stems from a single inclusive solution, one that offers the least expense in integration efforts and long-term upkeep.  The traditional ERP vendors of the 1990s who lost marketing cachet to upstart single-function product providers are likely the winners in the long run — with packaged, integrated cross-enterprise solutions that thoughtfully address the vast majority of business needs.  Oracle provides such an application suite, enabled with comprehensive intra-enterprise and business-to-business best practice business processes designed to generate a sustainable benefit stream.


