12B-3570 MAGAZINE
SILICON VALLEY BUSINESS INK
Czzcn’5
4 MAY 17, 2002 silicon valley BUSINESS INK
Apple server piques interest of Mac shops
Alegro Networks' Dean Nelson — "engineering geek No. 26" — is running 184 Apple G4 computers in his server room.
By STEVE TANNER
Companies that depend on Macs
appear ready to embrace Apple Com­
puter lnc.'s new rack-mounted, multi-plat-
fonn computer server.
But Apple, its popular logo seen more
in the home than in the office, has much
to learn about the fiercely competitive
enterprise market. J)
Released May 14, the Xserve will replace
revamped G4s or iMacs used as servers in
offices and schools.
“We actually could use them here,"
says Dean Nelson, test engineer with
San Jose-based router developer Allegro
Networks Inc. "I have 23 racks with four
G4s each; I could literally put that in four
racks [of the new Apple servers]."
Nelson likes the fact that they're com­
pact and designed first as servers. The
G4s, he says, are cumbersome because
of their original functionality as desktop
computers. If a power outage occurs, for
example, Nelson must reboot each G4 —
all 184 of them — by hand.
Although Nelson believes the new
machines are overpriced, he says Allegro
likely will be in the market for some soon.
The entry-level model with a single G4
processor costs $2,999, with the higher-
end, two-processor model selling at $3,999.
Mike Hathaway, systems support spe­
cialist for Fremont Union High School
District’s adult education program, is
excited about the new machines and —
despite Nelson's claims — sees them as
very affordable.
“This new server makes it actually 
cheaper, because you don't have to buy
additional components,” says Hathaway,
who is waiting to see how the state budget
looks when it's finalized this summer
With the current server setup, Hathaway
says, a down server can mean the outage
of an entire computer lab. Servers built as
servers, however, are built with redundan­
cy to prevent this.
“On the Apple end, we basically end up
using consumer desktop machines for
servers ... but you don't have that redun­
dancy,” Hathaway says, referring to the
vulnerability to failure that haunts the two
iMacs the district uses as servers for its
Apple computers.
Analysts, as well as Apple CEO Steve
Jobs, say the company’s server market
comprises education, creative media, video
and film production, and bioinformatics.
South San Francisco-based biotech
company Genentech Inc., for example,
plans to use the new servers for comput­
ing large gene sequences and has pur­
chased 1,000 new iMacs for its staff.
But the general enterprise market will
be a tough nut to crack.
The jury is still out on whether Apple —
known for its consumer-friendly computers
— can play ball in the enterprise market,
but it's putting its best foot forward.
“We’ve seen a lot of changes with
Apple over the last couple of quarters,"
says Tim Deal, analyst with Technology
Business Research Inc., just days before
Apple’s unveiling of the server. “They’ve
acknowledged and focused a little more
on the corporate end."
After the announcement, Deal expressed
enthusiasm for the Xserve, citing the com­
pact size, competitive pricing and interoper­
ability with various computing platforms.
One important aspect of the UNIX­
based Xserve, Deal says, is its ability to
support multiple computing platforms.
Even a company whose workers are run­
ning Windows could operate on the new
server.
“This is a historical moment for this incar­
nation of Apple; they’re breaking away from
their consumer desktop focus and encom­
passing products clearly targeting the
enterprise," says Deal.
Yet even Jobs expressed his under­
standing that tapping into the enterprise
market is no picnic.
“We're approaching this very carefully,
and we have a lot to learn," said Jobs, at
a May 14 press conference.
For the same reasons, prospective
customers may approach the new
servers cautiously as well.
Peter Kastner, chief research officer
with research firm Aberdeen Group Inc.,
likes the price and the technology, but
isn't confident that Apple can dent the
enterprise server market.
“It’s too late for Apple to get back into
the bread-and-butter enterprise market
for desktops and servers," Kastner says.
Steve Tanner is a Biz Ink reporter.
You can reach him at stanner@svbizink.com,
