
Apple Ships Hot PowerMac G5
Keywords: Apple, Macintosh, Power Mac, G%, desktop, workstation, Apple Computer

Apple began shipping the single-processor models of the Power Mac G5 desktops last week, and the dual-processor version is but a few weeks behind.  Apple is playing the performance card versus its PC competitors for the first time in a long time.  The G5 is a workstation that will make Mac customers proud again.  But it’s not to be confused with a high-end home PC.
The World’s Fastest Personal Computer(?)
Using the SPEC CPU 2000 benchmarks, a widely used cross-platform test which measures chip-level performance, the 2.0 GHz PowerPC G5 beats the Intel Xeon workstation processor and the Pentum 4 in floating point calculations, but loses in integer calculations.  When the high-end G5 with dual processors is tested, it beats the Xeon and Pentium 4 in integer tests and handily wins in floating point calculations.
Apple Mac users will also be pleased with the G5’s performance in Mac-centric applications such as PhotoShop.  For compute-intensive professionals who are already using Apple products, the G5 is the king of the hill — and the G5 has some bragging rights against the unwashed PC camp too, at least until Intel turns up the gigahertz crank.
The World’s First 64-Bit Personal Computer(?)
Now this claim is a stretch.  The PowerPC G5 chip is a true 64-bit processor, consuming data in wider bites than its 32-bit cousins.  The 64-bit design adds some the performance kicker, and it also breaks the 32-bit memory addressing barrier — the Power Mac G5 supports up to 8 gigabytes of DDR-400 memory.  Enough memory to keep large media files open and to avoid the performance-sapping problem of frequent paging to disk.
But first 64-bit personal computer?  That’s a hard case to make, as the Alpha, HP-PA, IBM PowerPC, and Sun folks have all had 64-bit workstations for years.  Even 64-bit Intel Itanium 2 workstations have been on the street for a couple of months from HP.  But these are pure workstations, plain and simple, while a very power user (pun intended) with a G5 could just as easily be making a movie as playing a movie.
Just the Specs
We cooked up a $3,998 Power Mac G5 at Apple.com.  It comes with two, 2 GHz PowerPC processors, 512 MB of DDR-400 SDRAM, a 160 GB serial ATA disk drive, a SuperDrive 
which reads and writes DVD-R and CD-ROMs media, an upgrade to the powerful ATI 9800 Pro graphics card, a modem, Mac OS X, and an Apple 17” Studio Display LCD flat panel monitor. 
Single processor versions with a 1.6 GHz CPU and no monitor start at $1,999.  A 1.8 GHz model fills the middle of the product line.
The Power Mac G5 supports a one-GHz front-side bus per processor, which keeps data flowing rapidly to and from memory.  The latest Pentium 4’s support an 800 GHz front-side bus.
As a workstation-class computer, the three PCI-X I/O slots make sense, as they support server-grade I/O peripherals at the fastest industry-standard speeds.  Also, the graphics support is for the latest, fastest 8x AGP cards from ATI and nVidia.
For external I/O, the G5 supports 5 USB ports, Fire Wire 800, gigabit Ethernet, and optical digital and analog audio.
Aberdeen Conclusions
The Power Mac G5 is the strongest performing offering that Apple has shipped in years.  It is a legitimate competitor to 32-bit workstations.  However, we see the G5 as renovating the Apple base rather than as an attack product against the PC world.  Enterprise Mac users — you know who you are — should plan on some lunch-break benchmarks with your work-related files and applications.  You will see a difference on the G5, even if the apps have not yet been tuned for the G5’s 64-bit processor.  Work up a spreadsheet on how much more productive you’ll be.  Confront the boss with how quickly the G5 pays for itself with the new, super-productive you…hey, we can all dream for an economic recovery.
~ Peter Kastner
Abstract
Hot Topic title:
Company Name
Date
Body
Author
Coverage Area: 

