SOURCE_URL: http://www.informationweek.com/news/software/operatingsystems/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=6500263
MIME: text/html

--> Slow Growth For IT Spending In 2003 -- IT Trends -- InformationWeek / TOP POP UP AD 1 of 2 --> /SUPERNAV --> Welcome Guest. | Log In | Register | Membership Benefits United Business Media --> InformationWeek Defining The Business Value Of Technology Part of the TechWeb Business Technology Network --> New Image Galleries: The Nokia N810 Linux Internet Tablet Doesn't Make Sense Vote: Dubious Dweeb, Courageous Crusader, Or Tech Terrorist? --> Apple's iPhone Rules Wal-Mart's Linux Retreat --> / Get IWK alerts --> / take IW with you promo --> / mobile promo --> / iw500 promo wide --> --> --> --> --> --> --> Get News On Your Phone --> RSS Feeds Subscribe Events Digital Library News Blogs Software Security Hardware Mobility Windows Internet Global CIO Government Careers CRM Databases Database Applications ERP Hosted Apps Server Virtualization Web Services Business Systems Management Application Optimization Integration Development Tools Linux Open Source Operating Systems SOA Applications Enterprise Software Reviews All Software Stories Software Blog Software Discussions E-mail | Print | | | Buzz up! Slow Growth For IT Spending In 2003 Aberdeen Group projects a good year for outsourcing, little growth for Linux on the enterprise desktop. By Gregg Keizer, Techweb News InformationWeek January 3, 2003 12:00 AM IT spending will show meager growth, outsourcing will be a bright spot but potentially troublesome, and Linux won't move out of the back of the shop. That's the take on 2003 from the Aberdeen Group, which this week identified its top tech trends for the coming year. And if the market-research firm is on target, outsourcers will have the most to look forward to. "More and more IT organizations are telling us that their executives have concluded that technology operations are not their core competency," says Peter Kastner, Aberdeen's chief research officer and one of the firm's 2003 crystal-ball gazers. The need for capacity to handle larger-than-usual loads, he says, is playing right into the hands of "computing-on-demand" outsourcers such as EDS, Hewlett-Packard, and IBM. More Insights White Papers The Threat of Modern Day Malware Making Sense of Message Archiving Requirements Webcasts The New Compliance Mandate: Enterprise-Wide Transparency Bang for the IT Buck. Breathing New life into Old CRM Reports App Development That Delivers Business Results Application Development That Delivers Videos Dr. Dobb's Mike Riley talks with Jim Manias of Advanced Systems Concepts. In this conversation, Jim discusses the new ActiveBatch 7 and how it can provide significant productivity gains for application developers and business process owners alike. IBM, for instance, has in recent weeks revealed major outsourcing deals with Deutsche Bank ($2.5 billion) and J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. ($5 billion). Kastner sees more deals like those on the horizon. But what's good for outsourcers may be less so for IT workers, who may be forced to leave the companies they know for outsourcing firms where conditions are different. And Kastner is particularly troubled by the trend toward outsourcing overseas. "That's a horse of a completely different color," he says, "and a potential economic threat to the livelihood of a lot of Americans." As for global IT spending, Aberdeen predicts modest gains: up 4% in 2003, from less than 1% in 2002. "That's inflation, plus or minus," Kastner notes, adding that it will be "back-end loaded" toward the close of the year. But Kastner stresses that the situation could turn on a dime--or a phone call from the executive suite. CEOs control considerable amounts of discretionary spending, and in the right scenarios they could free that money almost instantly. He cites as examples some clarification of the situations in Iraq and the Korean peninsula, and notes that congressional priorities and the president's State of the Union message later this month could also play a role. "Ultimately, psychology and not technology will determine the growth rate for IT spending this year," Kastner says. Other trends look firmer to Aberdeen, such as the growth of Linux. Growth in the Linux server sector will be 40% during 2003--not as dramatic as the 50%-plus boost in 2002, but still substantial. But don't expect 2003 to be the year of Linux on the enterprise desktop. While large system vendors such as Dell Computer, HP, IBM, and Sun Microsystems will continue to push desktop Linux (realizing, Aberdeen says, that they can sell more servers if there are corresponding desktops running Linux), the best supporters can hope for is that the open-source operating system will overtake Apple Computer at roughly 3% of the market during 2003. --> Discuss This Add Your Comment: Catalina588 [Logout] --> Subscribe to RSS » Write To Editor » Reprint This Article » Download Top Reports Advertisement InformationWeek Marketplace (Sponsored Links) ITT Technical Institute Get your degree today. Computer Networks, Information Technology and Security. Download Free SAP Financial Mgmt. Demo Register to Find out how SAP solutions can improve your profitability. Get "Data Leakage For Dummies" FREE! A Data Breach Can Be Costly, Meet the IT Vigilante & Order Your Copy Today. Solve Frontline Network Issues Fast View interactive guide to find the right tool for the task at hand and resolve those issues faster. Windows 7—join the conversation Take a look behind the scenes of the next generation of Windows Try Symantec Protection Suite today Protect Your Information Against More Risks In More Places. Advertise With Us Harnessing the Power of ITIL The Green Data Center: Cutting Energy Costs for a Powerful Competitive Advantage Top 5 Misconceptions about Data Protection Meet Business Imperatives with Trusted Information CAREER CENTER Looking for a new job? Open | Close Employers: Give your recruitment message influence. Advertise in the InformationWeek 500 . --> SEARCH Function: Information Technology Engineering Keyword(s): State: Post Your Resume Employers Area News & Features Blogs & Forums Career Resources Browse By: State | City SPONSOR RECENT JOB POSTINGS BTG - Now Hiring --> Featured Jobs: Boeing seeking Software Engineer 1 in Anaheim, CA Switch and Data seeking Site Facility Technician in Sunnyvale, CA New York Life seeking Insurance and Investment Sales in Schaumburg, IL Washington State Investment Board seeking IT Specialist in Olympia, WA Kforce seeking VA Mortgage Processors in Phoenix, AZ For more great jobs, career-related news, features and services, please visit our Career Center . CAREER NEWS Companies Looking To Hire CIO 2.0 After months of gloom and doom, companies are again hiring new CIOs. Minorities, Women Underrepresented In IT According to reports, minorities are underrepresented in high-technology companies. More articles from our career center Featured Software Resource 10 Steps For Stronger Application Performance Subpar application performance has an impact-on employee productivity, perception of IT, and the expectations customers and partners have about your organization's overall ability to deliver. We can - and must - do better. Here's how. read more The Latest News Articles Intel Dropping Centrino Branding In Laptops Firefox 3.5 Release Candidate Out Now Dell Expands Virtualization, Server, Storage Portfolio --> InformationWeek Marketplace (Sponsored Links) ITT Technical Institute Degrees offered in Web Development, Multimedia, Software Programming Windows 7—join the conversation Take a look behind the scenes of the next generation of Windows Advertise With Us See Image Galleries Get InformationWeek in Print Apply for a free 52-week subscription to InformationWeek (a $199 value) First Name: Company Name: Business Address: State: Select State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Dist. Of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virgin Islands Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Alberta Nova Scotia British Columbia Ontario Manitoba Prince Edward Is. New Brunswick Quebec Newfoundland Saskatchewan Northwest Terr. Nunavut Yukon Territory American Samoa Guam Marshall Isl. Micronesia Palau Puerto Rico U.S. Minor Outlying Isl. Northern Mariana Isl. Armed Frcs Africa Armed Frcs Americas Armed Frcs Canada Armed Frcs Erp AE Armed Frcs Mdl Est AE Armed Frcs Pcfc AP Other Email Address: Last Name: Title: City: Zip: NOTE: Offer valid for U.S., U.S. possessions, & Canada only. InformationWeek Home News Windows Security Mobility Internet Software Hardware CIO Central Research & Tools Careers Become A Member/Membership Benefits About Us Contact Us Current Issue Back Issues White Papers Briefing Centers Site Map Advertising Contacts Technology Marketing Solutions Editorial Calendar Other Techweb Sites: Informationweek Germany Network Computing TechWeb Intelligent Enterprise Dark Reading Light Reading Byte & Switch Internet Evolution bMighty out.println(" Small Biz Resource "); Insurance & Technology Wall Street & Technology Bank Systems & Technology Advanced Trading --> Terms of Service | Privacy Statement | Copyright © 2009 United Business Media LLC, All rights reserved. --> --> / TOP POP UP AD 2 of 2 -->