2010 Business Computers Leave the Starting Gate
By Peter S. Kastner

Hillsboro, OR (February 4, 2010) The 2010 model business personal computers and notebooks begin arriving today from the likes of Acer, Dell, HP, and Lenovo.  Built with Core i5 and i7 microprocessor chips manufactured at Intel's Hillsboro, Oregon fabrication facilities, the new machines arrive at a time when businesses are looking to replace the last generation of PCs.  

Desktops and notebooks with the new Intel microprocessors will have greater performance, lower electricity needs, and be easier and less costly to manage.

New Processors With Punch
The Core i5 processors for consumers were announced last month.  Today, Intel is rolling out the business-oriented versions, which are differentiated with a chipset that supports Intel's vPro technology for enhanced PC manageability.  

Based on industry-leading 32 nanometer semiconductor processes, the Core i5 for business features two processing "cores", each with a "hyperthread" that acts as a virtual processor.  Core i7 models are aimed at power users, such as design engineers.  The Core i7 has quad-processors, and most models also have four additional hyperthreads.  In design workstations, for example, a Core i7 has the processing power of high-end servers circa 2000.

The benefits of multiprocessing are evident to anyone who sits waiting for a computer to complete multiple tasks at the same time, like spreadsheet recalculations during a virus scan, for example.  My testing of Core i5 and Core i7 over the past two years shows hyperthreads can do as much as 90% of the work of a core, so in many ways the new Core i5 chips act like they have four computer brains -- four-way multiprocessing, and the Core i7 acts like an 8-way.  

The 2010 processors all feature advanced power management on the chip.  This technology acts like an intelligent faucet for electricity, dramatically lowering electricity demand when the computer is idle and ramping it up in a millisecond to meet increased demands.  Compared with the older computers now sitting on business desks, the new generation will save 1-2 kilowatt hours of electricity per shift per user.  The new models will help "green" the economy while cutting direct electricity expenses.  On notebooks, the power management features really shine by significantly extending a battery-charge life.

The third notable processor feature is new hardware instructions for encryption that will reduce the processor overhead for whole disk encryption, file compression, anti-virus, and secure virtual private networks (VPNs).  By reducing encryption and decryption to hardware instructions instead of software, I expect the business norm to shift to full disk encryption using, for example, the BitLocker facility in Microsoft Windows. Encrypted hard drives eliminate the corporate data hazard and liability of notebooks lost in taxi cabs.  But Internet sessions, emails, and other business information and communications also benefit from low-overhead encryption.  The Fortune 500 (especially Google) file and email hacking incident late last year is a warning to the business community to start locking down data itself, not just corporate networks.

Bottom Line: users will like the crisp response of Core i5 and Core i7 computers, the financial types will like the attractive improved acquisition- and support-cost story, IT will get more support done with less walking and talking, and the CEO will sleep better with the knowledge of the improved security of enterprise data.

Manageability Ecosystem Lowers Ownership Costs
The dirty little secret of business personal computers in the early 2000's was ownership costs.  My research showed the costs of PC hardware, software, and IT support in 2003 varied from $500 to over $2,500 per user per year.  For large organizations with tens of thousands of users, those costs got the CFO's attention.  By mid-decade, Intel delivered vPro hardware and software technology that enables dramatically lower IT support costs and facilitates best-in-class PC management processes.  In 2010, the vPro technology covers the full gamut of remote support and management.  Working with software and services partners such as VMware, Symantec, Citrix, and Microsoft, Intel has built a manageability ecosystem that has achieved widespread adoption by large companies.  This year, Intel and partners are extending support programs aimed at small- and medium-sized businesses world-wide.

One manageability scenario example is remote diagnosis and repair.  A user in a hotel room with a dead laptop telephones into the support desk, where a technician is able -- with the user's permission -- to connect, diagnose,  and restart the notebook.  A software repair can be made by the remote technician and the worker is able to finish a presentation.  While some of this scenario was possible in the past, it often required considerable technical participation by the user, and often required the technician to work with the PC hands-on.

Ant-theft protection is another polished feature, allowing a stolen or lost PC to be locked-down so no one can access the data or use the PC.  This year's vPro features new options for remotely adding back the found notebook to the corporate fold.

All of these manageability features are aimed at protecting business assets (hardware and data) while minimizing the time and labor to diagnose and repair desktops and notebooks.  Large organizations are typically geographically distributed, so they benefit from not having to have IT specialists at remote locations.  Smaller businesses, the target of this year's vPro marketing, often don't have the specialists on staff, so cost-effective remote support by a third-party service organization will be especially attractive to SMBs.

New Models Start Arriving
Lenovo's T series and W510 notebooks feature the new vPro technology as does the ThinkCentre M90 desktop.  Dell will ship the Latitude 13 notebook and Precision M6500 workstation later this month.  The Vostro 430 is aimed at SMB.  HP's Elitebook 8540p and 8440p have the new vPro technology, as does the HP Compaq Elite 8100.  All of these models and more will begin shipping over the next 30-45 days.  A typical 2010 business notebook with vPro technology will cost less than $1,000 (and note that business laptops are built more sturdily at higher cost than consumer notebooks).

Rich Echevarria, general manager of Intel's business client organization, told me, "The value proposition of Intel's 2010 vPro technology is clear and simple.  We have focused on letting our customers spend smart, do more, and be more secure."