Universal Servers: RDBMS Technology for the Next Decade 

Volume 9 / Number 13
June 3, 1995 

Universal Servers: RDBMS Technology for the Next Decade 

 Up to now, relational database management systems (RDBMSs) have focused
on simple types of data—integers, scientific floating-point, character
strings, date/time, and money—and do not handle more complex information
well. At the same time, the need for data-management solutions accessing
complex data—in data warehouses, Web pages, or competitive-advantage
applications—is exploding. 

 Five years ago, it seemed that object-oriented DBMSs might be the
answer. But the market has voted that OODBMSs are niche players, not yet
appropriate for large-scale or mission-critical applications. 

 Aberdeen finds that a real-world answer to IS' needs is now arriving: 
the Universal Server. Available and upcoming Universal Servers extend today's
market-dominant RDBMSs to handle complex data types, and provide exceptional
extensibility to meet future needs. Wisely chosen and effectively implemented,
these Universal Servers will give IS buyers"RDBMS invest-ment protection"well
into the 21st century. 

 Table of Contents 

 Executive Summary 

IS is in Trouble . . . Again 
 OODBMSs Are Not Enough 

 The Answer: Universal Servers 
 What Is A
Universal Server, And Why Is Its Architecture Important? 
 What
A Universal Server Adds 
 Business Benefits Of A Universal
Server 
 Picking The Right Universal Server 

Informix's Universal Server 
 Other Universal-Server
Competitors 
 Aberdeen Conclusions

 Executive Summary 

The elegance of the relational database model has survived for twenty years.
 The RDBMS has been so successful that five of the top-ten independent software
vendors (ISVs) sell relational databases—Microsoft, Computer Associates,
Oracle, Sybase, and Informix—not to mention IBM's DB2. But the RDBMS is
under considerable technology pressure due to the limited and simple types of
data understood by the RDBMS, notably integers, scientific floating-point,
character strings, date/time, and money. 

The technology pressure is coming from innumerable real-world applications
that demand more information from the data. When business managers ask the
simple question,"what are the 13-week average sales for our top-five
profitable products?"they do not expect that a highly-trained programmer
must churn out and test several pages of SQL code—and that the query will
not work next week without rework. This happens because the RDBMS does not
understand time series, moving averages, or ranking, so the programmer must
force-feed the RDBMS with a program embodying these"complex data types".

A reborn RDBMS is emerging, called a Universal Server, that allows IS
organizations, RDBMS suppliers and ISVs to extend the RDBMS with complex data,
functions, and access techniques. These new features give the Universal Server
RDBMS far great-er extensibility and flexibility, higher complex-data
scalability, and better fit with the new technologies such as Intranets,
relational OLAP (Online Analytical Processing), and new development toolsets.

The direct business benefits of Universal Server technology include much
greater programmer productivity, faster execution and response times for complex
data, and protection of the multibillion-dollar IS investment in installed
RDBMSs from obsolescence. Moreover, with dozens of ISVs creating cross-industry
and vertical-market-specific data extensions, IS will soon have many more
op-tions to buy relatively inexpensive, reusable components instead of employing
scarce database-programmer resources. 

Universal Server customers should be able to apply the technology to key
competitive-advantage applications across all industries, such as
higher-performance and deeper-data-mining data warehousing, better just-in-time
economic-order-quantity calculation, and handling video and image data in health
care, the entertainment industry, and sales' multimedia demos. Aberdeen
believes that Universal Server technology will become widespread over the next
two-three years as the RDBMS suppliers bring their products to market. Our
conclusion is that Universal Server technology will be one of the most
significant advances in RDBMS technology over the next decade. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 IS is in Trouble . . . Again 

Today's most serious challenge to the data-management supremacy of installed
RDBMSs is enterprises' increasing need for complex and function-related data. 
This business-driven IS requirement means that an enterprise's RDBMS hits the
wall when all data must be expressed in RDBMS terms as simple data types. The
world is not nearly as simplistic as today's RDBMS data model. 

Major IS- and business-strategy trends absolutely demand new and more
complex data types. For example, Relational OLAP asks for large-scale
multidimensional and time-series data that RDBMSs have historically supported
only with difficulty. And Internet/Intranet implementations demand text and
graphic data types that RDBMSs only partially support and have not fully
integrated with their traditional, simple numeric data. Furthermore,
object-oriented and client-server development toolsets fit best with
data-manage-ment systems when those systems provide high-level data types plus
data"encapsulated"with the functions that operate on it. In short, IS
has pushed the RDBMS model beyond its 20-year-old design capabilities. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 OODBMSs Are Not Enough 

In the early 1990s, object-oriented DBMSs (OODBMSs) seemed set to provide an
early answer to IS' needs. Designed to support object-oriented programming,
OODBMSs allow developers to handle high-level and complex data types, especially
CAD/CAM graphics and text databases. 

However, OODBMSs were created"de novo", and thus lacked the RDBMS
features that IS has come to love: superb query capabilities with the Structured
Query Language (SQL); excellent OLTP performance; and a huge ISV industry
providing complementary utilities and application solutions. The OODBMSs needed
to implement the full array of RDBMS features such as multithreading and SMP
support, distributed-database features, and open gateways from scratch in order
to match RDBMSs' scalability, flexibility, and robustness—in effect,
chasing a moving target from far in the rear. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 The Answer: Universal Servers 

Aberdeen believes that a real-world answer to IS' needs is now arriving: 
complex-data-type support added to existing, installed RDBMSs to create a
Universal Server. Instead of forcing suppliers and users to reinvent the RDBMS,
the Universal Server acts as a series of integrated and compatible extensions to
the RDBMS. 

The Universal Server promises to carry the RDBMS into the future by meeting
its most significant upcoming challenge—extensibility—and to ensure
that enterprises' RDBMS investments can continue to be leveraged—in effect,
an"RDBMS investment protection plan". 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 What Is A Universal Server, And Why Is Its Architecture
Important? 

Aberdeen defines a Universal Server as an RDBMS that offers users the
ability to efficiently access complex data types—including functions
related to particular data types—and support open, extensible user-defined
data types. 

Aberdeen particularly stresses the word"open"in this definition. 
RDBMS vendors have been extending their products with proprietary add-on
extensions for years. While buyers can take advantage of these add-ons, neither
users nor ISVs can extend the database to understand their own enterprises' or
industries' data formats, functions, or complex queries. 

By contrast, the Universal Server architecture is designed to let IS"have
it your way". Designing an architecture that promotes present and future"your
way"extensibility ensures an RDBMS framework for customizing the RDBMS to
its specific application mission, such as Internet OLTP. 

The other key point about a Universal Server architecture is that it does
not require major rewrites or upgrades to users' present systems: IS simply
adds new complex-data-type capabilities to an existing RDBMS, with minimal
effects on a production system. Thus, IS has full control over how much and how
rapidly it takes advantage of the new functions. Figure 1 shows a typical
Universal Server architecture. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 What A Universal Server Adds 

What does a Universal Server add to an enterprise's RDBMS? Practically
speaking, Universal Servers deliver the following new or upgraded capabilities:

 More support for complex data types —via specific
operations (e.g., search a video archive for a visual pattern) and storage of
new types of data (e.g., multidimensional, text, multimedia, and spatial). Many
applications can benefit from the simplicity created by having the data in the
right form for the application — and for the application user. For
example, a text-search capability applied to a comments field can extract useful
repeated information that defies today's RDBMS query capabilities; 

 More support for complex operations on simple and complex data
types, because support for more complex functions is built into the
extensions. For example, users of decision support systems can greatly benefit
from including statistics and mathematics libraries in the core RDBMS, since
they do not have to"reinvent the wheel"to implement complex data
analysis; 

 Greater efficiency in high-level data access and computation.
 Tuning the Universal Server's query optimizer, for example, for particular
types of complex data can yield major improvements in querying speed on those
data types. Likewise, complex computations such as pattern matching and
economic-order-quantity functions scale better, because developers do not have
to"reinvent the wheel"in optimizing access to complex data—the
Universal Server can do it for them. 

 Better fit with today's development tools, development
processes, and GUIs. While today's development tools and processes have
rapidly increased productivity by operating at a high level on objects,
components, and templates (and layering higher-level constructs on top of base
components), developers must still typically program RDBMS access at the
simple-data level. Likewise, data-displaying GUIs based on object-oriented
technology must link to crude relational data items. Universal Server
programming interfaces operate on the same high level as today's advanced
development toolsets, leading to potentially significant improvements in
programmer productivity for large-scale data-intensive applications. 

 Better fit with Internet/Intranet architectures. As
enterprises focus on scaling their Internet and Intranet architectures and then
connecting them to backend databases, they face challenges in merging text and
multimedia-heavy Web pages with simple-data RDBMSs. Universal Servers will
allow 'Net implementers to"have their cake and eat it too"—combine
complex-data-type-rich Web content with highly scalable RDBMS technology. 

 Effective ROLAP support. Complex data- type requirements
translate into support for more complex queries as data-miners drive ever deeper
into ever-larger data-warehouse databases. Today's Relational OnLine Analytic
Processing (ROLAP) and RDBMS suppliers' bit-mapped indexing, star schemas, and
aggregation support can deliver order-of-magnitude improvements in complex-query
speed, but further improvements require that multidimensionality, aggregation,
and time-series support be driven farther into the RDBMS's core, and especially
into the query optimizer. Thus, Universal Server support for multidimensional
and time-series complex data types allows both data-warehouse designers and
querying-application developers to take advantage of new complex-query speedups.
 Moreover, it incorporates multidimensionality in the core RDBMS, with
significant performance advantages over approaches using separate OLAP engines.

Most important of all, the Universal Server adds extensibility to the RDBMS.
 The Universal Server's open support for user-defined data types means that IS
has far greater flexibility to adapt to new user demands and technologies
requiring new data types down the road. Moreover, the new importance of
complex-data-type support plus the new extensibility tools together constitute a
golden opportunity for RDBMS suppliers, VARs, and IS to participate in a new
market delivering customized and vertical-industry-specific complex-data-type
support modules. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 Business Benefits Of A Universal Server 

Business managers asking the simple question,"what are the 13-week
average sales for our top-five profitable products?", do not understand the
amazing feats a SQL-skilled RDBMS programmer must perform to implement a
business-simple 13-word question. The programmer must first calculate the
profitability of products, then rank by profitability, and finally calculate the
13-week average sales. The query is useless next week because the 13-week
average changes every week. But Universal Server ROLAP extensions that define
functions for ranking, profitability, and time series would make the
program-mer's job much easier and the much shorter program more likely to be
error-free. 

In short, the immediate business benefits of Universal Servers are about
making it simpler for programmers, end users with desktop query tools, and ISVs
to express their data needs in terms much closer to business reality. This will
foster greater programmer productivity, faster"data knowledge"activities
by end users, and much more sophisticated tools from ISVs. 

However, Aberdeen believes that the long-term benefits of Universal Server
technology are even more significant, and will accrue to numerous commercial
applications in virtually all industries. For example: 

Bill-of-materials explosion or economic-order-quantity calculation, so
difficult with today's RDBMSs, will become relatively straightforward, and allow
much more effective just-in-time resource planning. 

Enterprises can query their videotape records and onsite-camera video
feeds for particular patterns. For example, video cameras monitoring an
assembly line can feed video data into a Universal Server database that can
detect anomalies such as defects and trigger corrective action, thus improving
product quality at lower cost. 

Table 1 lists other examples of targets of opportunity for Universal-Server
implementers. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 Picking The Right Universal Server 

Aberdeen Group recommends two yardsticks that are particularly effective in
determining how completely and how well RDBMS suppliers have implemented
Universal Server technology: 

 Degree of extensibility/flexibility. A Universal Server
should provide an architecture for extensions that handle a wide range of common
or important data types, and should allow IS to define custom data-type
extensions ("user-defined data types") for particular
vertical-industry or enterprise needs, e.g., a business-process-related data
type. A Universal Server should also supply flexible development tools and APIs
or class libraries that support high-level data access and integrate well with
an enterprise's other server-side development tools. Ideally, there is an
architecture that coordinates the many extensions and permutations needed to
meet real-world applica-tion requirements; 

 Integration of Universal Server technology with the major
components of the core RDBMS engine. Applying the scalability,
distributed-database support, and open flexibility of today's high-end RDBMSs to
complex data types requires that each major core-engine element support the new
data. For example, the query optimizer should provide special handling for
particular complex data types as well as a generic"BLOB"(binary large
object) data type. 

Other factors important in assessing a Universal Server include: 

 Performance . Key concerns are how much the high-level"veneer"with
which a Universal Server surrounds a complex data type can slow performance, and
(as noted above) how well the key RDBMS scalability techniques such as
cost-based optimizers and parallel-scalable technology translate to the new data
types. Aberdeen finds that none of today's RDBMS benchmarks can yet provide
comparisons of Universal Server performance in real-world customer situations. 
We recommend for now that enterprises create their own benchmarks based on their
own complex data types. 

 Administration . An effective Universal Server
administration tool should extend today's RDBMS and systems-management tools to
provide a view of—and allow operations on—both the overall complex
data type and its simple-data-type components, as well as the relationships
between components and the functions that may be associated with the data type. 
In the case of complex data types—some of whose components are on different
databases within a distributed database—the administration toolset should
provide both a global and a single-database view. 

 Transparency . The Universal Server should provide similar
or the same operations on complex data types as on today's simple data types
(e.g., insert, delete, join), a similar look-and-feel for data display, and APIs
or class libraries that require no migration effort for existing RDBMS-based
applications. This"overloading"will allow enterprises to reuse code
for new data types without major rewrites—a major investment protector.

 Back to Table of Contents 

 Informix's Universal Server 

Informix is taking a clear leadership role in Universal Server technology. 
The acquisition of Illustra means that Informix can combine its highly-regarded,
highly-scalable Informix-OnLine architecture with Illustra's
complex-data-type-supporting DataBlade modules. Full integration between the
two is scheduled for the end of 1996. Aberdeen finds that despite the usual
technical details, this target is clearly achievable. 

DataBlade modules—add-ons for each major complex data type—are
beginning to pour out. Informix anticipates releasing up to 25 Data-Blade
modules by the end of the year, covering major data types such as text (with
Verity), video, ROLAP, and spatial (via MapInfo) as well as specific functions
such as banking. Informix's INFORMIX-Universal Server development toolkit,
available now, provides a debugger and a class library for data-access tools,
and C-language-function support. 

In the future, users can take advantage of Informix's sophisticated NewEra
development toolset—in fact, users can already partition DataBlade
components flexibly between client and server. Importantly, VARs and
sophisticated IS users can also develop their own DataBlade modules. This
ensures that IS can take advantage of industry- and application-specific
database extensions. 

The resulting product goes far towards meeting Aberdeen's criteria. The
open extensibility of DataBlade modules plus the wealth of development tools
provides exceptional flexibility. Informix is also adapting key features of its
core architecture. For example, it is extending the query optimizer to handle
complex queries and complex data types at a higher level. This should add
complex-data-type performance scalability to an Informix-OnLine architecture
already regarded as a leader in parallel scalability, as evidenced by hardware
suppliers' partiality to Informix for TPC benchmarking. Implementation of
complex-data-type support throughout Informix's architecture should also lead to
exceptional support in its administrative toolsets and"overloading"across
DataBlade modules—Informix has announced that SAP, Peoplesoft, Baan, and
other major client-server applications will be able to migrate to its Universal
Server without application-code changes. 

Three years ago, Aberdeen stated that Informix-OnLine's parallel-scalable
architecture was so advanced and well conceived that competitors needed to go
back to their labs. This Informix initiative reestablishes that due to
Universal Server technology Informix is still the leader that others must
follow. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 Other Universal-Server Competitors 

The two RDBMS suppliers closest to Informix in Universal Server capabilities
today are Oracle and IBM. 

Oracle 7.3. Oracle 7.3 has folded the Oracle Video Server Option, Oracle
ConText Option, and Oracle Spatial Data Option into Oracle7. The Video Server
database is separate, while the ConText text database merged with Oracle7's
simple data is scheduled to ship in a few weeks. ConText is a strong text
extension to Oracle 7.3. Oracle's Developer/2000 development toolset provides a
server-side multimedia-data-type toolkit. However, these complex data type
extensions are still distinct database servers, not fully integrated with
Oracle7 and not highly extensible. For more extensive integration and
user-driven extensibility, Oracle customers must wait for Oracle's"object"release,
tentatively called Oracle Universal Database, which is presently scheduled for
sometime next year. In the relational OLAP area, IRI's OLAP database
functionality is not yet integrated with Oracle7, although Oracle should
announce significant IRI-based extensions to its products in summer 1996. 

IBM DB2. IBM's DB2 Common Server (for OS/2 and Unix platforms) provides
functions to access parts of a data type, and the ability to insert a data type
too large for main memory into the database from a client file or CD-ROM. DB2
also includes bundles of triggers, user-defined data types, and user-defined
functions for particular data types called Relational Database Extenders (e.g.,
a text server, imaging server, audio server, and video server). For example,
Extenders will support fingerprint analysis and querying by SQL of image content—color,
shape, or pattern. The text Extender may be particularly valuable to users in
the long term, because it includes information-retrieval technology. IBM has
not yet driven this complex-data-type support deep into the DB2 architecture or
provided a sophisticated client-server development toolset for creating
user-defined data types. Extenders are not yet included in DB2 Parallel Edition
or DB2/MVS. 

Computer Associates. CA's two-database strategy includes Jasmine—an
OODBMS with a multimedia- and Internet-enabled toolset—plus its CA-Ingres
product. CA presently has no plans to combine the two or otherwise offer
Universal Server functionality. CA-Ingres has not yet fully integrated
complex-data-type extensibility or driven it into the architecture. 

Sybase and Microsoft have not yet implemented complex-data-type support
comparable to Informix. Sybase has announced efforts to include such support in
the past, validating the importance of Universal Servers to its customers. 
Sybase has also announced plans to provide an Adaptive Server combined with
Sybase's Object-Connect middleware to allow ISVs to link"snap-in"complex
data types with the System 11 RDBMS. Aberdeen anticipates that both Sybase and
Microsoft will emphasize providing"base"APIs and class libraries for
their customers, giving them added flexibility but requiring them to do more of
the work of implementing a Universal Server. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 Conclusions 

Aberdeen offers the following conclusions: 

 One: Universal Servers are here. The new RDBMS versions from major
suppliers offer complex-data-type support and extensibility that allow users to
begin creating value-added applications immediately. 

 Two: Enterprises can win competitive advantage by using Universal
Servers in innovative, bottom-line-affecting ways. These include deep-er
data mining, greater large-scale-application development productivity, and new
complex-mathematics and data-manipulation features for present
customer-interface and back-office systems such as economic order quantity and
brokerage realtime financial modeling. 

 Three: Informix is presently leading in Universal Server technology.
 Illustra technology, soon to be merged with the Informix RDBMS just as
extensible DataBlade modules arrive from dozens of ISVs, meets many of the key
criteria for delivering full Universal-Server power—e.g., extensibility,
complex-data-type support driven into the core RDBMS engine, and
development-toolset support. Oracle and IBM are also providing new
complex-data-type support, and these and other RDBMS suppliers such as Computer
Associates should deliver further Universal Server capabilities by 1997. 

 Four: IS buyers should begin planning and prototyping Universal Server
implementations now. The ability to leverage complex data types gives IS
both a wide-open playing field and plenty of targets of immediate opportunity: 
developing major applications, enhancing data warehouses and application
servers, and incorporating Universal Servers into multimedia Intranet and
Internet architectures. However, many of the major long-term benefits are
likely to come from innovative functional or vertical-industry applications such
as the ones cited in Table 1. To succeed in these, users need to begin right
away to"learn the ropes"in such areas as design, administration and
scaling performance. 

The next big RDBMS-technology wave—the Universal Server—is here,
and it promises RDBMS-investment protection beyond 2005. To leverage the new
technology effectively, IS needs to choose a Universal Server wisely, target
strategic opportunities proactively, and begin to plan for implementation
immediately. 

 Back to Table of Contents 

 Aberdeen Group
 , Inc. 

 One Boston Place
 Boston, Massachusetts

 02108 USA Contact: Chris
Stevenson
 Voice: (617)723-7890
 Fax: (617)723-7897 
 Email:

 stevens@aberdeen.com 

 The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations
mentioned in this publication are the property of their respective holders. 
Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this publication are copyrighted
by Aberdeen Group, Inc. and may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior written consent of the
publisher. 

Copyright © 1996 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachussetts 

This Document is for Electronic Distribution Only
 -- DO NOT
COPY --