[Page 1]
Market Analysis and Positioning Services
for Business Technology
AberdeenGroup
Why Aberdeen?
To prosper in today’s volatile markets, technology suppliers must:
•
Anticipate rapidly changing technologies and business conditions
Resolve market confusion, which slows adoption
Build a unique value proposition to differentiate themselves in a crowded market
Aberdeen Group is a leading Information Technology market analysis and positioning services firm that
helps business technology suppliers establish leadership in emerging markets. Aberdeen’s goal is to help
our clients position their products and services for success. Since 1988, Aberdeen’s client engagements
have been based on the following core competencies:
Market
Research
Dialogue
with
Players
Technology
Positioned
in a Business
Context
Vision
To each client engage-
ment, Aberdeen brings its
knowledge of the industry,
developed by gathering
primary market data.
Aberdeen helps its clients
understand current mar-
ket conditions as well as
potential industry trends.
Access to senior-level executives
in technology suppliers, leading
user organizations, and the
investor/venture capital com-
munity gives Aberdeen unique
market and technology insights.
Aberdeen concentrates on whether a
technology has a practical applica-
tion and whether a supplier has a
sustainable business plan.
Aberdeen develops action plans
upon which our clients can execute
practical go-to-market strategies.
Actionable
Strategies
Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com

[Page 2]
AberdeenGroup
Engaging with Aberdeen
Aberdeen’s business model illustrates how business technology suppliers can engage with
us. The cornerstone of all Aberdeen services is a one-on-one relationship with our clients
based upon custom presentation of key market findings.
Primary Market Research
Aberdeen generates primary
qualitative and quantitative
market research data on
emerging technology mar-
kets. In addition to our pub-
lished research, clients can
engage with Aberdeen for
custom research activities.
Consulting Services
Aberdeen offers a variety of
consulting services that help
clients position their products
for success across the product
lifecycle. These engagements
are structured as interactive
dialogues and can involve a
single analyst or multiple ana-
lysts working in different
technology sectors.
Audience Education and Training
Through a variety of consulting
deliverables Aberdeen amplifies a
client’s positioning message and
unique value proposition. Aberdeen
also works to train and align a
client’s internal audiences, including
the sales force and channel partners.
Strategy
Acceleration
Primary
Market Research
Publications
Cross-Group
Engagement
Single Analyst
Webcasts
Ongoing Advisory
Services Relationship
An interactive advisory service is at the core of
Aberdeen’s services offerings. This gives a client
direct access to a highly experienced analyst
who understands that client’s technology and
market. This relationship generally becomes
the foundation for all other Aberdeen consult-
ing services.
Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com

[Page 3]
AberdeenGroup
Additional Services
Although Aberdeen offers a portfolio of predefined services, each consulting engagement
is uniquely designed to meet a client’s specific needs.
An analyst can provide customized strategy
acceleration services that enable sales teams to
improve and shorten their sales efforts and
support a client’s market positioning goals.
These solutions can be customized to include
e-Learning-based sales training.
Aberdeen analysts provide insights into mar-
ket trends and supplier strategies by partici-
pating in a company-sponsored Webcast for
prospects and customers.
Impact: An Aberdeen analyst’s synopsis of
how a supplier’s new announcement or
product introduction will affect a market
and that supplier’s future prospects.
Profile: Represents an objective, third-party
review of a supplier’s go-to-market strategy
or a supplier’s major product families.
Executive Briefing Paper: An in-depth
report on emerging technologies or com-
mon end-user problems. It is generally used
to educate the market on how a company’s
product addresses these issues.
Research Reports: For organizations that
need to quickly get up to speed about mar-
kets and suppliers that are new to them.
Marketing Workshops
Our marketing workshops are specifically
designed as interactive dialogues between
client senior managers and a team of senior
Aberdeen analysts conducted on-site.
Aberdeen analysts and clients are likely to dis-
cuss these types of topics during a marketing
workshop: Market Knowledge, Positioning
Strategy, or Message Optimization; Due
Diligence; and Competitive Analysis.
Strategy Validation
Aberdeen’s Rapid Accurate Market Positioning
(RAMP) engagement works for clients who
need in-depth primary customer and
prospect market research and analysis
within a short time frame.
Market Knowledge
Positioning Strategy
Message Optimization
Due Diligence
Competitive Analysis
Custom Research
Strategy
Acceleration
Consulting Services
Audience Education
and Training
Publications
Webcasts
Validation
(RAMP)
Aberdeen consulting services include:
Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com

[Page 4]
AberdeenGroup
Coverage Areas
Aberdeen’s research is presented in technology segments.
These segments are the emerging technologies that
Aberdeen feels will most significantly
impact enterprises’ business
operations over the next
generation of
IT systems.
Relying on Aberdeen’s 14 years of experience,
clients turn to us when they need help developing effective go-to-market strategies.
Count on Aberdeen to help you position your company for success.
Boston: 617-723-7890 • Palo Alto: 650-325-5100 • Ft. Collins: 970-232-7000 • Amsterdam: +31 (0)23 568 5929
www.aberdeen.com
For more information on how to engage with Aberdeen Group:
Call 800-577-7891
Or e-mail info@aberdeen.com
Professional
Services
Automation
IT
e-Business
Collaborative
Product
Commerce
Supply
Chain
Management
Customer
Relationship
Security
Enterprise
Systems
Data
Knowledge
Applications
Mobile
and Handheld
Devices
Communications
Service
Providers
Personal
Storage
Next
Generation
Networks
and Internet
Infrastructure
Application
Platforms
120701

[Page 5]
Aberdeen Advisory Access Service
Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com
AAS
AberdeenGroup
Aberdeen Group’s Advisory Access Service (AAS) is a retainer-based interactive service that gives
decision-making client executives one-on-one custom access to an Aberdeen analyst — when they
are needed. AAS is at the heart of our service offerings, and all active clients receive the Core Access
Deliverables (CAD) during the course of their client engagements with Aberdeen for no extra charge.
One of our experienced research analysts will be designated as your
relationship manager. The analyst will be in a research practice area
that covers your primary IT market.
Offered in all technology sectors, clients can customize or build on
the service by adding consulting days, custom research or other
Aberdeen services.
You will have access to the published research and analysis of your
primary IT market. This research forms the basis for our intellectual
discussions about your company on market dynamics, trends, and
competition.
Aberdeen Group will meet privately with clients to share observa-
tions and perspectives at all relevant trade shows that your Aberdeen
analyst attends. Your analyst will walk the show floor with you and
discuss the competition’s trade-show positioning as well as any hot
new entrants.
Aberdeen Group will make itself available as a creditable third-party
source to assist your public relations and press release efforts with
appropriate objective quotes and background press briefings.
Reasonable telephone or e-mail access is provided to your designated
Aberdeen Group analyst for you and another contact at your company.
To provide you with Aberdeen’s latest research findings in your tech-
nology market and discuss their relevance to your company, Aberdeen
Group will hold a one- to two-hour briefing with your company.
Core Access Deliverables
A Designated Analyst
Analyst Consulting
Interactive Briefing
Telephone and
e-Mail Access
PR and Press Interaction
Trade Show Dialogue
Research Access

[Page 6]
Boston: 617-723-7890 • Palo Alto: 650-325-5100 • Ft. Collins: 970-232-7000 • Amsterdam: +31 (0)23 568 5929
www.aberdeen.com
Why AAS?
•
Provides timely “ad hoc” access to market research experts who can provide strategic
advice on market conditions, competitors, or strategy options.
Offers access to Aberdeen’s published primary market research, insights and analysis
on an ongoing basis — as well as a live analyst to talk about market dynamics as the
market changes.
Fosters a trusted, long-term advisory relationship with Aberdeen Group, the analyst,
and the analyst’s practice group.
Provides Aberdeen analyst availability to field press and media inquiries and provide
access about a client’s organization.
AAS

[Page 7]
Marketing Workshops
Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com
Aberdeen offers a variety of consulting services that help clients to position their products for success
across product lifecycles.These engagements are delivered in workshop form as executive-level interac-
tive dialogues, and can involve a single analyst or multiple analysts. Aberdeen Group’s lifecycle model of
market consulting services includes structured or custom arrangements throughout the process of mar-
ket and product planning.
Consulting Services
AberdeenGroup
Market
Knowledge
Go-to-Market
Positioning
Messaging
Strategy
Readiness
Vision
Develop
Prepare
Custom Consulting
and Research
Acceleration
Webcasts
Publications
Think
Plan
Do
Market Knowledge
Goal: Expand and clarify impact of market trends
Agenda: Major market trends, market forecast, market segmentation, competitive landscape
Key Issues: How market shifts affect your offering, necessary business planning response
Outcome: Actionable insights into market dynamics, assessing market opportunities
Next Steps: Go-to-Market, expanded internal education
Goal: Examine and choose the best market, positioning, and messaging opportunities
early in launch planning
Agenda: Market and competitive trends, positioning options, key messages
Key Issues: Anticipating the market conditions at launch time
Outcome: Choice of the right marketing theme and direction for the market conditions
Next Steps: Market Positioning, field research, e-Learning sales training

[Page 8]
Boston: 617-723-7890 • Palo Alto: 650-325-5100 • Ft. Collins: 970-232-7000 • Amsterdam: +31 (0)23 568 5929
www.aberdeen.com
Consulting Services
Market Positioning
Goal: Bullet-proof current positioning, or reposition a product offering
Agenda: Examination of product positioning, market readiness, competition
Key Issues: Strategy to position against competitors, expand product/company differentiation
Outcome: Essential re-positioning steps to strengthen marketing impact, sales readiness
Next Steps: Messaging Strategy, field research, market communication, Executive
Briefing Papers
Messaging Strategy
Goal: Examination of how to communicate your product positioning
Agenda: Review current go-to-market strategy, evaluating strengths and weaknesses
Key Issues: How to accelerate demand in a crowded market
Outcome: Guided evaluation of corporate and product launch-media
Next Steps: Go-to-Market Readiness, third-party Executive Briefing Papers, e-Learning
sales training, PR/advertising training
Go-to-Market Readiness
Goal: Bullet-proof launch deliverables prior to public release
Agenda: Review all public launch deliverables
Key Issues: How will customers, partners, press, industry and financial analysts react to the
launch?  Are communications crisp?
Outcome: Communications and PR activities that anticipate likely concerns and highlight
announcement differentiation