Digital’s
top financfe
chief quits
By Aaron Zitner ----
GI.OHH stakk 
A month after its stock plummeted because Of an
unexpected and disastrous financial repoit, Digital
Equipment Corp, yesterday announced the resignation
of the man responsible for accounting and communica­
tion with Wall Street analysts.
The departure of William M. Steul, the chief finan­
cial officer, was the second among the company’s upper­
most ranks since Digital announced a surprising $1X3
million loss for the third quarter. Days after the April
15 announcement, Edward E. Lucente, the worlwide
sales chief and No. 2 executive, left the company.
Digital blamed the quarterly loss on declining ser­
vice revenues and other factors, but Wall Street .ana­
lysts said they were disappointed by the company"^.in­
ability to predict its own financial results. XX;
Digital said yesterday that it had replaced Steul with
Vincent J. Mullarkey, 46, who as the company’s corpo­
rate controller had reported to Steul. Mullarkey joined
the company in 1971, the same year he graduated from
Bentley College, prompting criticism from one local an­
alyst
“The only financial experience Vin has ever had was
with Digital,” said Franc Romano of Aberdeen Group in
Boston, a former Digital employee. “I don’t believe he
brings the broad perspective that is necessary there or
the cash management skills the company is going to
need."
But another analyst Richard Buchanan of Forrester
Research Inc. of Cambridge, said Digital’s financial ac­
counting system “is so arcane and quite specific to the
history that Digital has passed through. To bring in an
outsider to decipher that would be tough to do.” At the
same time, Buchanan said, the financial accounting sys­
tem “is broken in many ways and needs to be fixed."; -
Steul. 51. was a 22-year veteran of Digital and the
financial chief for two years. Before him. Digital’s finan­
cial chief was James Osterhoff, an outsider recruited
from Ford Motor Co. who was highly regarded for im_-
posing financial discipline. •;
Mullarkey worked with Robert B. Palmer, Digital'*
chief executive, at the company’s semiconductor group.
When Palmer became head of worldwide manufactur-
ing, Mullarkey also moved to continue working with
DIGITAL. Page 83

THE BOSTON GLOBE
Finance chief
at Digital resigns
■ DIGITAL
Continued from Page 81
him, Digital officials said.
Separately yesterday, Digital
discounted a report that it was
spending cash at a troubling rate.
The Maynard-based company,
which is the nation's No. 3 computer
maker, acknowledged that treasurer
Ilene Jacobs had warned colleagues
in a memo April 22 that cash had
dropped from $1.26 billion at the
close of the third quarter in March
to between $938 million and $988
million in mid-April.
In the memo, disclosed Thursday
by The Wall Street Journal, Jacobs
wrote that “at our current rate of
cash outflow, we will be borrowing
against accounts receivable within
three months."
Bradley D. Allen, director of in­
vestor relations at Digital, said cash
flow has been within “the normal
ebb and flow” that the company usu­
ally sees in a “calling attention to ap­
propriate things at the appropriate
time so you can affect the outcome."
“We are well positioned in terms
of cash and have plenty of levers to
work,” Allen said. For example, he
said, the company could cut the num­
ber of days it takes for clients to pay
their bills, which is above industry
standard. The company has also said
it may try to sell some units, which
would raise cash.
Digital stock dropped % yester­
day, to 23%, on the New York Stock
Exchange.
(Material from the Reuters news ser­
vice was used in this report)

