Midline Messaging Workshop Prep Guide






Facilitated by Aberdeen Group
    - Peter Kastner
    - David Hill
    - John Boyne




Table of Contents
How to Use This Guide	2
Workshop Goal	2
Logistics	2
9:00 Session Preparation	3
1:00 Session Preparation	3
3:00 Session Preparation	3
Appendix A: Key Pools of Storage Concepts	4
Appendix B: The Foundations of Messaging	5

How to Use this Guide
    1. Read the Workshop Goal (below).
    2. Look for your name in the Logistics table below to determine which session you will attend.
    3. Read the material for your session PRIOR to the meeting time, so you come prepared. The appendices are provided for support material only.

Workshop Goal
Create corporate agreement about the value of the midline category and midline category messaging that supports Maxtor's aggressive foundation of this category in order to ensure Maxtor's continued profitability. This messaging will enable the creation of tools that support outreach to analysts in the industry (financial and technological), and provide the basis for a sustained market-building campaign around the midline category.

Logistics

Date	February 13, 2004
Place	Maxtor Corporation, 333 South Street, Shrewsbury, MA
Room #
Session One
9:00 	Executive Team
Stephen DiFranco
Mike Cordano
Joseph DeRosa
Linda Burchik
Session Two
1:00 	Core Team
Need names
Session Three 4:00 	Executive Team
Stephen DiFranco
Mike Cordano
Joseph DeRosa
Linda Burchik


Session One Preparation
Goal: Determine where the market is and where it will go; construct the midline category; identify and prioritize market influencers
Questions to consider prior to the workshop:
    1. What is your idea of a go-to-market strategy for the midline category?
    2. How can Maxtor influence the creation of a new midline storage class without looking self-interested in pushing drives?
    3. Where do Maxtor products fit in the changing enterprise storage ecosystem?
    4. What are the most important factors to consider when determining storage class? (Price, capacity, performance, reliability, etc.)
    5. What is the most credible threat to the emergence of the midline category?
    6. Which Maxtor competitors are friends and which are enemies regarding the creation of the midline category?
    7. What are 3-4 attributes of midline storage that need to be incorporated in the definition of the midline category?
Midline Attributes




    8. Why won't the existing categories evolve to fill the supposed role of the new category?
    9.  What attributes of MaXLine drives should be used as "requirements" for midline drives so that MaXLine has a competitive advantage while still having competition?

MaXLine Attributes





    10.  Please list positive and negative midline category differentiators 
Positive Differentiators	Negative Differentiators
	
	
	
	
    11.  What program goals and success metrics should be set?
Goal	Date	Metric
		
		
		
		
		


Session Two Preparation
Goal: Testing the straw man with stakeholder business units and Maxtor go-to-market managers
Questions to consider prior to the workshop:
    1. Who are the market influencers? 
Which reporters and publications do you like to work with? 
What publications do you respect? 
Who are key industry analysts? 
Who are key storage analysts on Wall Street?
Who are key user-influencers? 
Are there consultants who could help the emergence of this category? 
    2. Are there market influencers that could be negative toward the midline market? 
Who are they?
How can they be won over or neutralized?
    3. Which audience segment(s) should be the focus of a midline category market strategy?  How can we maximize time-to-market and bang-for-the buck in Q2-Q3?
    4. What long-term, market -building programs are necessary
    5. What are the relative merits of alternative approaches to midline market-building?
        a. Academic journal articles
        b. Advertising
        c. Analyst white papers
        d. Conferences
        e. Decision-making tools
        f. Industry associations
        g. Trade shows
        h. Trade-press articles
        i. Vendor white papers
        j. Wall Street technology trends
        k. Web seminars
        l. Web site with research
    6. Who are the logical partners for Maxtor to work with?
    7. Prioritize a list of midline market-building initiatives for 2004 with ballpark budget. 
Marketing program	Approx. Budget
    1. 	$
    2. 	
    3. 	
    4. 	
    5. 	
    6. 	
    7. 	

    8. 
Session Three Preparation
Goal: Refining the message; reaching agreement; giving the go-ahead.

Questions to consider prior to the workshop:
    1. What is the single most important thing we need to do to make the midline market successful?
    2. How educable do you feel the market is regarding storage options?
Appendix A: Key Pools of Storage Concepts
Key Definitions
    - Information Lifecycle Management (ILM)-manages "content" through different stages of its life using some degree of policy-driven software automation
        ? Assign data to the least expensive storage device possible without compromising service
        ? Transfer data to different storage resources as it ages and access needs change

    - Pools of Storage-a pool is a homogeneous group of storage hardware that meets service level requirements for access to data with a certain level of capital and management intensity; a pool of storage is a target of the ILM process

    - Midline Storage-high capacity disk storage that has lower price per gigabyte as well as relatively lower performance than higher performance disk storage; suitable for low I/O duty applications


Stages of Data Life











Appendix B: The Foundations of Messaging
Storage Buying Decision Justification
    - Fit within existing budget constraints-to get done what it needs to get done without running over budget (TCO)
    - Net positive savings to IT-enables IT to do more with less (ROI)
    - Benefits to end-users that exceed IT costs-IT provides benefits to the enterprise as a whole rather than to itself (ROI and business value)
    - Competitive advantage-provide value to the enterprise externally as well as internally (business value)
Business Value of Storage Decisions
    - Economic value (best use of capital) of hardware based in the utility of the data at each stage of ILM.
    - Reducing capital costs, improving return on capital, aligning more closely to business policy, and insuring the synchronized expansion of storage systems with storage growth requirements are some of the goals.
    - Not only improving TCO (Total Cost of Ownership) - a cost efficiency argument - and ROI (Return on Investment) - a cost benefits argument, but also business value - an advantage to the business argument
Criteria Used in Making a Buying Decision


















Optimal Messaging Outcomes
Strategy-What we are trying to do?
    - Take market share away from competitors
        ? Maxtor must be externally focused and focused on the competition
        ? Maxtor must force competitors to give it market share
    - Establish a basis for sustainable competitive advantage
        ? Maxtor must compete other than on the basis of price

Positioning -Where we want to fit?
Positioning against competitors
    - Seagate Barracuda 7200.7 Product Family
        ? Seagate wants to protect its dominance in the FC disk market; it will be reluctant to compete aggressively in the midline market
    - Western Digital Caviar Product Family
        ? WD does not have extensive experience in selling to "business"; it sells products, not solutions
    - Hitachi Deskstar 7K520 Series
        ? Hitachi Global Storage Strategies focuses on the "right product at the right time"; as with WD it has a product and technology focus rather than a business solutions focus

Messaging-What we need to communicate that resonates with potential customers.
    - Messages
    - Buying proposition
    - Collateral
    - Case study

Understanding the Buyer
    - Demographics - descriptive characteristics of the buyer
        ? Title, size of company, etc. 
    - Psychographics - the use of demographics to study the values, attitudes, and opinions that affect the buying decision

Messaging Basics
    - Literal messaging - focuses on functions and features
        ? Quality, value, price, feeds and speeds, etc. 
    - Experiential messaging - elicits emotional responses
        ? Solution to a problem


