
April 28, 2002
A Kinder, Gentler Larry Ellison?  Oracle 
Turns New Face to Its User Community
Oracle Apps World in San Diego had a different feel this year.  New product announcements were largely absent, but an emphasis on installed base satisfaction was more evident.  This user meeting focused on upgrade pathways for the customer base to the Web-based e-Business Suite, Oracle 11i.  This change reflects the stark realities of the current enterprise software market — and the fact that upgrading the installed base remains the core of the new license revenue opportunity for the moment.  The event also marked a rapprochement with the Oracle Application User Group (OAUG), an independent users association. 

Focus:  Upgrade!
Traditionally, a user group conference is an opportunity for a software company to strut its new stuff — new products or solutions — with the purpose of enticing users to purchase newly released products.  At Oracle Apps World, however, the message was “let’s get you guys to use what we already have” — the e-Business 11i release of the applications, first released about two years ago.  Fighting early concerns about code quality and implementation difficulty, Oracle has been working on improving the existing product.
Currently, approximately 50% of the Oracle client base is using a 10× release of the applications suite.  That is approximately 1,500 customers.  Enterprise applications clients are traditionally slow to upgrade ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning), SCM (Supply Chain Management), and CRM (Customer Relationship Management) applications because they are inhibited by the prior integration and customization investments that may require re-implementation and organizational change management issues that are often part and parcel of the new version.  And, the initial releases of Oracle 11i had QA (quality assurance) problems that further dampened the enthusiasm of existing customers to upgrade.
Enhanced Features
Oracle has clearly been busy over the past year addressing the QA problem.  But they also have made enhancements to 11i including the ability to conduct a “daily close” for any part of the organization.  This ability, while not unique to Oracle — Lawson Software users have had this capability for some time — allows businesses to see the corporate wrap-up on a daily basis — clearly much more compelling than once a period or quarter. The concept of a virtual close is growing in financial circles — primarily as a vehicle to facilitate shorter period-end closing cycles, more timely delivery of financial results both internally and externally, and improved decision-making and bottom line performance.  As a vehicle of close-to-real-time monitoring of company health, this feature should appeal to Oracle users. 
Rebirth of Outsourcing
Oracle has long been a proponent of applications hosting, outsourcing, or business process outsourcing — the software as a service model.  From the early claim that only Oracle will host Oracle applications for its customers, Larry Ellison, Chairman and CEO, now encourages partners to support users seeking outsourcing of application management and support.  That was evidenced by the number of application service providers (ASPs) on the trade show floor this year.  The ASP providers all claimed positive response from their customers, and growth in the numbers of applications users seeking out their services.
In addition, however, Oracle renewed a pledge of “we’ll do it for you” to users — even to the extent of buying back the user’s investment in hardware and IT (Information Technology) staff to support the application suite for the customer. The company promises that outsourcing to Oracle can save a significant amount on IT infrastructure costs (cited were customer ranges between 31% and 84%).  In addition, according to Oracle, product and service response time can improve by as much as 50% by letting Oracle manage and maintain its own software.  The outsourcing campaign is progressing on a global basis — not limited to North America.
Customer Focus Prevails
A newly launched focus on customers is evident in several ways.  11i customers joined Oracle executives onstage to testify to successful 11i implementations. Senior executive Mark Barranchea has been moved — from heading CRM — to spearhead improved customer care and relations, a new role created at a top level in the Oracle hierarchy.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Clearly, it benefits an enterprise application vendor to have as many customers as possible on the most recent revision of the software purely for support reasons.  But equally important, the newest version is always the basic platform for extended functionality.  As a result, the upgrade is a key event in “unlocking” additional revenue opportunities within the installed base.  But customers need compelling reasons to make these upgrades — unless they reach the end of the support lifecycle for their current version.  It is a fact across all enterprise business environments today, that keeping up with revision release is declining.  Oracle’s presentations at Apps World show a commitment to work closely with its users to move them forward to 11i at a more rapid pace — a “win-win” scenario from, at least, Oracle’s perspective.


The Oracle commitment to manage the entire process for the customer should make it easier to move up the release food chain.  And, Aberdeen expects customers to respond positively to many components of the service and hosting propositions that Ellison pushed forward to the assembled multitude.  But today’s businesses won’t be rushed for many reasons relating to the economy, the general slowdown in IT investment, and the magnitude of effort involved in any upgrade.
Nothing is more important to a corporation than its customers.  Oracle has not historically been viewed as a highly “customer-centric” software organization. A new customer-care focus of Oracle’s highest management was reflected at the Apps World event, and Aberdeen finds this heartening for Oracle customers. Generating and maintaining customer loyalty and support has helped many companies weather times of crisis (witness Baan); it can only help Oracle as well.  

Katherine Jones

