**Remarks of Peter Kastner to the Massachusetts Chamber of Commerce — January 29, 2003
**

For the Massachusetts high-tech community, 2002 will be remembered with as many fond memories as the Patriot’s nation had in their disappointing year.

The loss of 15,000 jobs in Mass. high-tech is sobering to all of us for several reasons:

Based on the duration, breadth and severity of this recession, there will be no 90 day turnaround that gets us back to what we had been two or three years ago.

The recession effects each of the key telecommunications, hardware, software, and services segments of high tech. Overall, 5.7% of the high tech job base was lost in 2002.

Many of these lost jobs are at the high-income white collar, middle manager, and executive level. Those unemployed people are now economically hunkered down, thus reducing spending – and tax obligations – throughout the local economy.

Massachusetts continues to lose manufacturing jobs as companies such as Lucent contract, Hewlett-Packard reengineers itself, and China becomes the world’s low-cost producer. We are also seeing the effects of IT outsourcing.

Mergers and acquisitions contributed to the bleak picture. IBM is acquiring Rational Software of Westford with as yet unannounced staff reductions. Genuity of Woburn was acquired by Level 3 Communications with the loss of 800 jobs. Precise Software was purchased by Veritas…

All in all, 2002 was like a root canal — best forgotten as soon as possible. Yet in spite of these difficult changes to the Massachusetts high-tech situation, all is not doom and gloom.

First, Aberdeen Group is predicting a global expansion in information technology spending in the 3%-4% range. That is likely to be back-end loaded in 2003 due to the first quarter concerns about the economy and war. A generation of computer systems has inexorably crept into obsolescence. This creates pent-up demand for replacement hardware, software, and services. The boats will rise on the flood of an inevitable incoming economic tide.

Second, those unemployed, mid-career, high-net-worth high-tech executives and technicians are a cadre for the next generation of Massachusetts start-ups. I expect 2004 to be a banner year for new and innovative products from companies now building ideas and prototypes in Massachusetts garages. Preferably,
*heated* garages…

The funding for these new companies will come from angels, friends, and family, since the traditional VC sources of funds is largely closed out for new ventures at this time.

Third, we expect a continuation of the high-tech industry consolidation. This will benefit the many Massachusetts shareholders — including stock-option holding employees. The IBM acquisition of Rational Software, for instance, is resulting in cash payouts of $2.1 billion.

Fourth, we see continued capital investments in strategic initiatives with a high Massachusetts value-add. Intel, for instance, is building a whole new multi-billion dollar xScale business around the ARM-architecture microprocessors manufactured in the old Digital Equipment plant in Hudson.

I firmly believe we will gather here in 2004 with better news to tell.

Thank you.

##