=== PHI-brochure-2-7.txt ===
﻿



A MESSAGE FROM THE EDITOR
From a cellar operation back In 1959, when
our total corporate capability consisted of
four technically sophisticated professionals
(fondly called "whiz kids") who possessed
the ability to pragmatically apply technical
theory to the solution of specific problems
and at the same time apply sound business
practices to the management of projects,
we've grown to become one of the leading
full service data processing companies in
the nation. Our three operating divisions
now provide a wide variety of computer
services and products to more than four
hundred clients. Professional computer con­
sulting and programming, our sole "prod­
uct" in 1959, is still a major corporate activ­
ity. Today, these functions are performed
by PHI’S Professional Services Division
(PSD) in the same proud tradition as estab­
lished by the "whiz kids." This issue of
Update focuses on PSD's special compe­
tencies.
Manufacturers,
Distributors, And
Retailers Data Processing
Needs Met By PHI’s
Business Applications
And System Specialists
A highly specialized group within the com­
pany's Professional Services Division enables
PHI to offer the business community a
comprehensive series of business applica­
tions which may be used on a standalone
basis to solve individual problems or in
combination to create an integrated business
system. Each application employs simplified
data entry techniques, a flexible and com­
prehensive report generation facility, and a
complete series of linkages which permit
the application to communicate with a
centralized data base and with other applica­
tion modules. These application modules
have been developed as a result of PHI'S
experience with the commercial, industrial,
and institutional environments. They are
operating on a production basis at clients'
computer facilities and at the PHI Data
Center on a service bureau basis for cus­
tomers who do not have their own data
processing equipment.
We use these business applications as
modular building blocks to create specialized
systems to solve individual customer prob­
lems. Our basic philosophy is that a
customer should not have to compromise
his business information or data processing
requirements to suit the constraints of an
"off the shelf” package; but rather that these
exact requirements should be fulfilled by
an integrated system constructed from
standard, modular building blocks. By com­
bining the talents of this expert staff of
business systems specialists with our library
of proven applications, such systems have
been built, installed, and are successfully
operating in all types of business environ­ments. For a new brochure describing PHI'S
integrated business system use the handy
Data Retriever or contact Wolly Morin.
Professional Consulting
And Systems Services Of-­
fered For Users Of Honeywell Large Scale Computers
PHI’s Professional Services Division recently
formed a special consulting team to pro­
vide professional assistance to users of
large-scale Honeywell computers. These
data processing professionals have years of
experience in the implementation of large-
scale data processing systems and possess
a working knowledge of the newly an­
nounced Honeywell Series 6000 Computer
line.
Their expertise includes the design and
implementation of business data processing
systems for the manufacturing, distribution,
insurance, retailing, hospital/medical,
and educational industries. To each of these
industries, the group can bring broad
based fourth generation technical knowledge.
Specialists are also available in the area
of telecommunication processing who are
familiar with both of its aspects — remote
batch and on-line inquiry; and in data
base design utilizing Honeywell's Integrated
Data Store (IDS). A unique automated
structure testing technique is used to control,
verify, and generate documentation prior
to installation. This technique also provides
a fast, easy, and economical method for
modifying the data base during and after
installation.
With the formation of this group, Honeywell
customers can now benefit from the
professional resources of PHI that have long
been enjoyed by users of other major com­
puters. For more information contact
John Pryke or just fill out and mail the
Data Retriever form in this issue of Update.
This Is PSD
Professional Services is the PHI Division
responsible for the design, specification,
implementation, and installation of program­
ming and software systems for computer
users and manufacturers. The Division
is composed of four groups — Commercial
Programming, Financial Systems, Systems
Analysis and Design, and Systems Program­
ming — each specializing in a particular
discipline or industry. The Division’s capa­
bilities extend from the evaluation and
selection of computer hardware and software
for customers installing their first data
processing equipment to providing system
programming, applications, and tele­
communication programs for sophisticated
EDP users.
Lawrence J. Munini, Division Manager, states
that “Rather than attempting to be a uni­
versal programming organization with the motto 'Have coding pad will travel,’ we have
identified certain specialty areas where
the expertise of our professional staff mem­
bers can have the greatest effect. In addition
to performing projects for clients, Profes­
sional Services has been responsible for the
in-house development of PHI'S Payroll and
Fixed Amount Billing Systems, as well as
for the continued evolution of enhanced op­
erating systems for our Data Center. We
also work closely with our parent company,
Wang Laboratories, Inc., in new product
development For example, our R&D group
helped develop the software for the new
WANG 3300 computer series, using third
generation computer technology.” To give a
more precise picture of how PSD performs
its specialized professional activities,
Mr. Munini briefly outlined the functions
of each Group.
Commercial Programming Group develops
Integrated Business Systems to solve the
data processing problems of manufacturers,
distributors, and retailers. Each business
system developed by PHI, is constructed from
a series of application modules such as
accounts receivable, accounts payable, gen­
eral ledger, inventory control, order entry,
sales analysis, and production control.
These individual applications are next
tailored to the exact machine environment
and information needs of the client and then
integrated into a complete system. The
Group’s basic philosophy is that a customer's
requirements should not have to be com­
promised to fit a "canned" computer
package but rather they should be met to
the letter. Typical of the problems that
have been solved are: an integrated order
entry/sales analysis/inventory control
system for a leading concern in the optical
products industry; a comprehensive ma­
terials planning and work center accounting
system for an electronics manufacturer;
and a total manufacturing information system
for a plastics company. In each of these
cases, PHI’s system provided the client with
the controls he needed, as well as increased
his profit potential.
Financial Systems Group develops custom
systems and packages for the banking
and financial communities. This Group has
assisted banks throughout the United States
and Canada with both their automated
customer services and internal banking appli­
cations. PHI is well known and respected
by the people who staff banks' Automated
Customer Services Departments (responsible
for the marketing of a bank's data proc­
essing services) as a result of our compre­
hensive payroll systems, application
management system, and Fixed Amount
Billing system. Within the internal banking
systems environment, the Group’s pro­
fessional activities include: implementation
of a correspondent bank demand deposit
accounting system, a bond portfolio analysis
(Continued pg. 2)

system, and a mutual fund processing
system. Other financial systems which have
been developed include a comprehensive
personal trust accounting system which
is completely responsive to the stringent
legal requirements of the Massachusetts Pro­
bate Court System: a flexible general
ledger accounting system; and an on-line
terminal system that provides small account­
ing firms with an accurate, fast, and
economical way to handle transaction data
entry, processing, and report functions
for their clients, while relieving them of the
enormous clerical burden inherent in a
manual operation.
Today the Financial Systems Group is com­
mitted to applying the knowledge and
experience gained in the development of
these systems and PHI's proprietary software
packages to individual problems faced by
the financial community.
Systems Analysis and Design Group provides
consulting, product evaluation, and design
services to manufacturers developing
new products for the computer industry and
to users of the IBM Systems/360 and 370.
In the former area, the Group has worked
closely with manufacturers developing
products compatible to the IBM System/360
and System/370 product lines. Activities
include: consultation on IBM systems tech­
niques and protocols to help the non-IBM
vendor understand the System/360 and
Syslem/370 environment: evaluation of
different design concepts with an eye towards
maximum product reliability, and competi­
tive position; and the specification of
diagnostic software for testing new products.
The Group’s assignments range from a
few days' consulting to comprehensive
testing of systems utilizing PHI-developed
diagnostic routines and the facilities of the
PHI Data Center. To date, the Group has
assisted in the development and testing of
seven different System/360 multiplexor
and selector channel interfaces for teleproc­
essing controllers and front-end communi­
cation processors, as well as providing
nine different remote interfaces for IBM-
compatible terminal devices.
For sophisticated System/360 and
System/370 users, the Group has concen­
trated on the continued development and
enhancement of the IBM Operating System
(OS/360). Typical of its achievements
have been the effective utilization of the
Ampex Extended Core Memory at the PHI
Data Center, the development of new
billing algorithms for the service bureau
environment which base rates upon machine
resources used rather than elapsed time,
effective utilization of new System/370
hardware, and improvements in the
System/360 telecommunications software.
Serving in the role of PHI's "think tank,” the
Group paves the way for large scale imple­
mentation efforts which solve product
development, systems programming, and
telecommunications problems.
Systems Programming Group implements
sophisticated systems software and on-line
applications. In the former area, the Group
has developed assemblers, cross assemblers,
compilers, and operating systems for
leading manufacturers of computer equip­
ment including: IBM, Honeywell, Hewlett-

Packard, and Sanders Associates. Some of
the Group's most significant efforts include:
the development of the tape and disk
utilities for the IBM System/360 Model 20
(systems software which is provided as
Class A support by IBM); disk IOCS for the
Honeywell H-516; the System/360-resident
simulator for the Hewlett-Packard 2100
series computers; and a real time operating
system for the SANDAC 200 communications
processor.
In addition to assisting computer manufac­
turers, the Group has participated exten­
sively with end-users in the design and
implementation of on-line systems. Projects
have ranged from the development of several
teleprocessing concentrators for use in
airline passenger reservation systems to the
implementation of an automated dirt com­
paction test system for the New York State
Bureau of Soil Mechanics. One of the
Group's major accomplishments has been
the development of the PHI Telecommunica­
tions Programming System (TPS) which is
People are PSD'S prime resource. Our
success in providing top quality professional
services to clients throughout the United
States, is directly attributable to the dedica­
tion, professionalism, and teamwork of our
talented staff of consultants, analysts,
and programmers. We'd like you to meet a
few of the people that make our professional
activities possible.
Peter S. Kastner has been involved in the
development of a broad range of systems
and applications in the financial area, from
PHI's own internal accounting system to
a correspondent bank demand deposit
accounting system for a large Chicago bank.
He is presently a Systems Analyst with
PSD's Financial Systems Group.
Robert A. Siegel is a Supervisory Analyst
with PSD's Systems Analysis and Design
Group. In this professional capacity, he is
responsible for applying his special expertise
to projects in the areas of System/360
hardware and its Operating System (OS).
Among his achievements are the implemen­
tation of Operating System modifications
to support efficient use of the Ampex ECM on
the PHI System/360 Model 65 and the
implementation and enhancement of
RJE/HASP.

regarded as the most comprehensive front­
end software available for the IBM telecom­
munications environment. This system, when
Implemented on a minicomputer, permits
operation both as a plug-for-plug replace­
ment for an IBM 2700 series Transmission
Control Unit, and as a full front-end pre­
processor which relieves the System/360
CPU of much of its communications over­
head. This system is currently operating at
several locations, including the PHI Data
Center. TPS which can be considered as a
"customizable package,” is sold on a nation­
wide basis to System/360 teleprocessing
installations. The Group also offers a series
of demonstration and diagnostic programs
designed to test, demonstrate, and maintain
IBM-compatible terminal devices. Programs
are currently available for the IBM 2260/2265
keyboard display units and for Binary Syn­
chronous devices including the IBM 2780
and 3270. PHI is now regarded as one of the
foremost authorities on the IBM communi­
cation environment.
Wollaston B. Morin is an expert in the area
of integrated business systems, having
designed and successfully implemented a
wide variety of accounting and management
information systems for commercial, indus­
trial, and retail firms. A practical business­
man, as well as a professional analyst, Wolly
now serves as Supervisory Analyst for PSD’s
Commercial Programming Group. In this
capacity, he is primarily involved in tech-	 	
nical/marketihg activities. He holds a degree
in Business Administration from Boston
University.
Arthur G. Yafte possesses a broad profes­
sional background in the area of minicom­
puter assemblers, systems design in the
communications environment, operating
systems, and data communications facilities.
As a Supervisory Analyst with PSD’s Systems
Programming Group, Art has served as
project leader for the implementation of a
large on-line mutual fund system and for the
development of a System/360 front-end
preprocessor for a major insurance com­
pany. Arthur holds a degree in Electrical
Engineering from Carnegie Institute of
Technology.

New PHITAX Package
Cuts Payroll Tax
Maintenance
PHI announces the development and
availability of PHITAX — a packaged module
for the calculation of Federal, State, and
local payroll tax deductions. The new module
has been designed for use with PHI Payroll
Systems, as well as most other payroll
systems. By generalizing tax calculation
procedures and isolating actual tax rates in
tables, the module reduces tax maintenance
expense.
In an actual payroll processing environment,
program control is passed from the payroll
system to PHITAX for tax calculation on
regular, supplemental or any other type of
payment. All calculation procedures are
accomplished and then individual tax tables
are accessed and deductions executed.
Because the tax tables are thus isolated, the
updating of any new tax information is
simplified and streamlined, and PHI esti­
mates that PHITAX can reduce maintenance
time and expense. The PHITAX module is
written in COBOL, can be installed easily and
is available as either a package or as an
enhancement to PHI Payroll Systems. Pur­
chasers of the new module are also provided
with installation manuals, training manuals,
and documentation, as well as a twelve
month warranty and maintenance contract
at no additional cost. For more information,
just fill out and mail the handy Data Retriever
coupon or contact James Lees.
 	
Verification
The Update extends its congratulations to:
• James Lees — promoted to Manager of
Proprietary Products
• John Morse — promoted to Manager of
PSD's Systems Programming Group
• John Pryke — promoted to Sales Man­
ager for Professional Services Division
We are pleased to welcome Leo Fleck to
PHI. Leo recently joined PSD’s staff as a
Senior Consultant. At PHI, Leo will direct
PSD’s newly formed consulting service group
for users of Honeywell Large Scale Systems.
As both a former Honeywell employee and a
user of Honeywell Large Scale Systems, Mr.
Fleck brings to his new assignment an
extensive professional background and
knowledge of the Honeywell environment.
We are also pleased to announce that Bob
McLaughlin, a familiar face to all of PHI's
Payroll users, has recently joined Profes­
sional Services. Bob will be assisting our
Payroll customers in the use of PHI's
professional consulting and programming
services.
 	
Systems Analysis And
Design Operates PHI’s
Computer Interface
Laboratory
Passing through the back corner of the PHI
Data Center, one is forced to stop and stare
at a collection of strange cabinets and
computers hooked to our System/360 Model
65. This area, nicknamed "PHI's Interface
Laboratory" represents a growing segment
of PHI’s business: developing and testing
360 channel interfaces — seven in all, each
with a different computer. The Honeywell
H-516, Bunker Ramo keyboard display
channel interface. Data General Nova. DEC
PDP-11, and Tempo 1 are among the ma­
chines already tested by our laboratory.
Operated by PSD's Systems Analysis and
Design Group, the "Laboratory" is the final
testing ground of the Group's consulting
aclivilies with manufacturers of IBM-
compatible hardware. Answering basic
questions regarding IBM channel protocols,
reviewing interface hardware designs,
developing diagnostic and test programs for
both the System/360 and the device being
interfaced, providing test time on our
System/360 Model 65, and assisting during
tests, the Group has been referred to by
one client as "the Underwriters Laboratory
of the 360 Interface." One of our staff
members has even suggested blue tags for
each interface marked "Approved by PHI."
Data Measurements
Corporation Licensed To
Sell Special Version Of
PHI Airline Terminal
Support Package
Data Measurements Corporation of Santa
Clara, California, manufacturers of the DMC
201 hard-copy airline reservation terminal,
has recently been licensed to sell a type­
writer-only version of the PHI Airline Ter­
minal Support Package. The new version of
the package will support 32, 48, or 64 DMC

201 or IBM 1977 terminals from an 8K
Honeywell H-316 computer. The package is
designed as a direct replacement for the
Honeywell Programmable Terminal Inter­
change software (which will only support 32
terminals) and allows an airline to add
more terminals without adding any new
H-316 hardware. It also provides error
logging and diagnostics for individual lines.
The new software is available either from
Data Measurements Corporation as part of a
terminal procurement or direct from PHI. The
package can be easily upgraded to support
standalone CRTs, as well as hard-copy
terminals. This feature provides emulation of
both an IBM 1006 and 2948 Terminal Inter­
changes in a single H-316. The CRT-version
of the package has been in operation at
Texas International Airlines for over six
months.
 	
Binary Synchronous
On-Line Diagnostic And
Demonstration Program
Now Available
Based upon the immediate success that
PHI's 2260/2265 Diagnostic and Demonstra­
tion Program gained with CRT manufacturers
of 2260 compatible products, we have
developed a similar program for testing and
demonstrating IBM binary synchronous-
compatible devices. The new program sup­
ports the following IBM terminal types and
their functional equivalents:
• 2780 Data Transmission Terminal
• 2770 Data Communications System
• 2972 General Banking Terminal System
• 2715 Transmission Control Unit
• 3270 Information Display System
• 3735 Programmable Buffered Terminal
• Programmable remote batch terminals
and concentrators which use Binary
Synchronous line discipline.
Users find that the program serves as an
engineering and marketing tool, as well as a
field testing facility for their respective
terminal.
For more information, fill out and mail the
Data Retriever form in this issue of Update
or contact Dick Stenger.





























Opportunity to retain professional team with one
of the most successful track records in the
industry. In 12 years, we’ve grown from a small
group of "whizz kids" to third in the nation.
Particular expertise in product line software for
hardware manufacturers; System 360 interface;
on-line control; real-time systems; Commercial
Applications; IMS programming; and hardware
evaluation and consulting. Significant on-going
experience with leading corporations and institu­
tions including Chase Manhattan Bank, Braniff
Airlines, Bunker-Ramo, Digital Equipment Cor­
poration, Penn Mutual Life Insurance, Hewlett-
Packard, Marine Midland Banks, Honeywell
Computer Control Division and IBM. Success of our own packages (such as Telecommunications
Programming System, Payroll System, Fixed
Amount Billing, Cosmos, etc.) is proof of ability.
On-site Data Center (largest in New England)
available for development and implementation.
Will travel. Contact John Pryke at (617) 648-8550.
Subsidiary ol  WANGL laboratories. Inc.
COMPUTER SERVICES, INC.
SOO MASSACHUSETTS AVE . ARLINGTON. MASS 02174 • (SI 7) 648 SSSO
consultants for systems applications and development -an array of
supporting software -a computer network offering sophisticated
hardware, software, and technical assistance - comprehensive data
processing services.



=== Memoir-Scratch-Pad-4.txt ===
﻿Memoir Scratch Pad

UFRJ
1 The UFRJ project called for ADL to provide hospital administration procedures including applications tailored to run on the universities Burroughs 6700 computer. Basically, ADL delivered manuals of procedures and the computer applications to administer a brand new 250 bid teaching hospital which had no staff.
 We came up with a terminal based design because the hospital was about 7 kilometers away from the university computer center at the design review the you have RJ administrators, who spoke English, hemmed and hawed but we eventually understood why we had to scrap the design. The proposed online terminals had to be paid for in U.S. dollars, and foreign exchange was a big problem for Brazil at that time. However, UFRJ had an answer for us: The application would be forms based, with batches of forms carried from the hospital to the computer center continually by new workers on bicycles paid the minimum wage this was social justice as it created jobs for the people near the favela (slum)  which the hospital was built  to support. Social justice in action.
We wrote the design documents in English and all of the application cobol code in English. Professional translators provided the proper documents for forms. The Burroughs 6700 was easy to use: much less grief than the IBM 360 for job control, for instance.
2 The manual labor on bicycles served as social purpose and was not different than what chase Manhattan bank was doing at the same time in New York except for the movement by bike.
3 The year of support… ohh the stories. Yes telex was used but it was not effective so I became an early Pan American frequent flyer making 3-4 overnight trips between Boston and Rio de Janeiro. Stayed in a hotel on the beach near Ipanema. took a taxi out to the university data center. There were a few bugs that were corrected and the last one turned out to be a system programming flaw. This took place in the ADL project off at the university. Our window air conditioner had been removed, and sweat dripped on my coding pad in the 104 degree heat.
the burroughs indexed sequential access method for cobol didn't work and I ended up writing a small program to prove that and brought the results back to Boston to get it fixed. One hitch was at the airport going home. Brazil is a very moral country and things like pornographic movies are strictly forbidden. however computer magnetic tapes are very sensitive and not designed for customs officers to pull the tape off the reel streaming onto the floor of the airport looking for the images of forbidden subjects. meanwhile I'm yelling in pigeon Portuguese that it's computer stuff and not anything else. eventually I retrieved the tape, wound it back up and could do nothing but take it back to Boston and hope it worked, and bless it the tape was still good. Remote support is a bitch.

4A Background: ADL initially told me to pack for an 18 month assignment in Rio. They actually unwittingly proposed leaving my wife in Boston for a year and a half. And the project needed two more COBOL programmers; my wife, Kate, was a COBOL programmer so a deal was made: we got less than two stipends. The third programmer was Barbara Kruesi, a volunteer from ADLS. The project leader was Hans Nijkamp, a Dutchman hired for the project. It did not occur to me that the project did not require Hans, who had to work hard to look busy, and that I was perfectly capable of managing the technology side. I was probably viewed as too young and risky to be on this overseas project as an unproven manager. The project was slated to run 18 months and include a pharmacy inventory system. That was replaced with a migration of a Minnesota hospital system. In late September, and without disclosed reason, the project was told to finish by year end. So we worked harder to meet that schedule. Overall, the project team spirit was not great as we had the commute, a do-nothing project leader, the due date, and the business culture differences.
4B. Life in Rio de Janeiro was generally great. The exception was the daily commute across town in rush hour traffic, horrific air pollution, and Boston-level drivers. The good-to-great parts included
    • Living a block from the famous Leblon beach in a furnished apartment. We hired a Portugese-speaking maid to cook and keep house. That forced our Portugese along. Plus the project funded a language instructor to work with us during lunch hour.
    • Weekend use of the project VW hatchback. Peter, Kate, and Barbara went every point on the compass in that reliable car. We also travelled to Belo Horizonte with a Brazilian-American, to San Paulo, Salvador da Bahia, and a long weekend in Manaus in the Amazon. On exiting Brazil, we departed through Foz do Iguaçu on the Paraguay/Brazil/Argentina border, Buenos Aires, Ecuador, and Peru.
    • The military junta made the streets very safe day and night. We took advantage of off-work hours in a sub-tropical area with bars, beaches, and friendly people. Moreover, there’s not just one girl from Ipanema, they’re thousands on the beaches every weekend.

The ADL Proposals
Adl consultants would often propose transformational projects at the C-level and get funding to do a functional specification. In retrospect, I was brought in on about ten of these design opportunities and absorbed a great deal about businesses I knew nothing about. Designing a new system meant going out to factories and laboratories to see production lines, talk with users, and tease out the ROI opportunities. Many were never implemented, yet I gained the knowledge of how that particular problem could be automated: Some of these from my resume include:
    • Ocean Spray Cranberries started as an ADL consulting assignment
    • CitiBank late-1970s minicomputer SWIFT funds transfer
    • Wisconsin electric: remote meter reading using AC voltage fluctuation at five baud to avoid a telephone line connect
    • Production system for Parade magazine, then a Sunday newspaper insert nationwide
    • Kraft paper manufacturing for Continental Forest Industries: trees to cardboard at thousands of feet per  second.
Houghton-Mifflin deserves its own section. A classic story never told. HM was a big Honeywell shop. They needed a new order-entry and inventory control system. After a long development effort and some testing, it was decided that it would be convenient to cut over to the new system on January 1st. New accounting year and all that. We got the call in the early spring and put together a 4-man COBOL team working onsite until the job was done. HM’s system was so flawed that bookstores were refusing to pay invoices and the physical inventory at warehouses by auditors failed. The most important bed news was HM could not close its books, and the clock was ticking before the company would have to tell the NYSE to suspend its stock. In short, hair-on fire catastrophe with massive, public implications. The job entailed debugging, one-off programs to repair files and accounts, and a lot of late nights. Then, another disaster: HM had so much processing that it was sending a teenager in a van to run cards, tapes and disks to Honeywell’s regional data center down Boston’s famous Route 128. The kid flipped the van. “Cleanup on Rt. 128.” Meanwhile, someone started calling in bomb threats. The first few cleared the building for hours. By the fifteenth, it was no big deal. You know, the team never got recognition or a big thank you for a heroic effort that turned out well. That’s the problem with big stories nobody wants out in the public.
The bottom line is all those ADL design proposals pumped an enormous amount of industry application knowledge into my experience which proved invaluable later in market planning and market research.

The Big Picture
The totality of my ten year career as a programmer-analyst involved a wide breadth of industries, vendors, architectures, and computer technologies. Add in all the stock market expertise I gained in personal use as well as assignments such as Chase Manhattan, made it possible for me to look at the computer industry as a whole. Virtually all other analysts focused on a particular company or technology area. I could explain trends and how they impacted specific industries, or particular vendors’ product architectures. I had the experience and confidence to take it all on. In that I was unique, and I didn’t quite realize that until well into my Aberdeen career.

Junior Programmer at PHI
I was quite surprised to learn the high respect for Philip Hankins, Inc. (PHI) while researching my memoirs 55 years later. I never knew at the time that Hankins himself programmed parts of the Apollo moon project navigation system, which means I was truly working with rocket scientists.
I started as a junior programmer at PHI in March 1969 at a salary of $7,200 a year. A modest start but I was now a programmer at a professional services company with a data center. The computer operations career was behind me.
I quickly learned while watching customer printouts scroll by that I was not doing too badly: a study of bank officer titles and salaries informed me that many bank vice presidents earned in the $6,500 range. Lessoned Learned: titles are cheap.
I was hired to fix the PHI internal accounting system (see ADL bio), which was costing the company thousands of dollars a month in internal computer time charges. Lesson 1: computer time was $360 per CPU hour. In other words, 20 hours of computer time was equal to my annual pay. Computer time was precious and programmer time (human labor) was not. That equation is completely reversed today, of course, but for today we’re back in the 1960s reality.
PHI’s longstanding customer billing algorithm charged customers by CPU usage inside the application. Eventually, it was realized that the IBM System 360 MVT operating system was consuming a significant amount of billable CPU time running its own tasks and, in particular, user program input-output calls to the OS. Another problem was job step overhead; fewer steps cost less. One of the prime offenders was the PHI internal accounting system, a kluge of six COBOL programs and a Cosmos/CAS application. I was hired to optimize those programs to lower computing costs in the new computer-time billing algorithm which charged customers for I/O calls. Nobody in PHI professional services wanted to touch the code, so I was the luck new hire to get the job. It took about three months to shuffle and glue the six programs into two programs with internal sorts. Along the way, the wonderful data center systems programmers taught me a career’s worth of job control language, I/O minimization, dump reading, and other tricks of the trade. It was an invaluable apprentice’s opportunity on how to be good at the job. 
Apprenticeship was about the only way to learn more, especially practical technology. Things like setting a switch in a single instruction with no memory (slow!) reference. Literally, the tools of the trade were:
    • IBM System 360 reference card—assembler instructions
    • Coding forms for each computer language
    • Plastic templates for making flowcharts. (Sorry, no Visio then)
Moreover, there were no databases, no project management or estimating tools, no debugging aids besides a memory dump, no application libraries or tools except ones you made yourself. And you got one, maybe two computer jobs run in prime shift a day. This made night shift work particularly attractive for productivity through turnarounds.
It’s true. I see programmers today whip up a bunch of code and compile it without a glance, fix the compile problems, and try a unit test. Given the precious nature of computer time, my programmer generation always spent time looking for the keyboard error before the job was run.
After 90 days as a junior programmer (and no doubt whose performance was carefully watched), I was invited to join the PHI professional services division as a programmer/analyst.



=== PSK-technical-bio-ADL-5.txt ===
﻿PETER S. KASTNER Professional Biography (1979)
Mr. Kastner is a senior member of the staff of Arthur D. Little Systems, Inc., 
a division of Arthur D. Little, Inc. His responsibilities include systems design 
and implementation, project planning and management, and computer systems 
consulting assignments. While primarily specialized in many aspects of business 
systems, he is also experienced in law enforcement, hospital administration, accounting,
real-time systems, and minicomputer sizing, selection and procurement.
A large international bank [Chase Manhattan] required design consulting and implementation
expertise for a massive trust securities handling system. Mr. Kastner
managed and acted as lead designer of the securities subsystem.
He assisted in the design of the client account and conversion subsystems.
During the project implementation, Mr. Kastner managed and acted as chief
programmer for the securities subsystem. The application used the
COSMOS application management package to minimize development time.
Once converted, an IBM 360/65 processed 174,000 unique securities held
by over 25,000 trust clients with a combined value of over $10 billion [1975]. The 
securities subsystem manages these securities, producing sixty accounting, 
customer and management infor­mation reports. The project was done under severe time 
constraints as the existing punch-card-based system literally ran out of spare parts 
to keep it running. Using COSMOS, Mr. Kastner and another programmer had 25 million 
lines of debugged COBOL code ready in under a year.

Mr. Kastner designed, programmed and installed three sales analysis
systems for a major publisher [Houghton Mifflin]. One system grouped product sales by
geographic region in order to measure textbook acceptance at individual colleges. 
The second system analyzed company sales and produced detailed reports for a 
publisher's association. The aggregated industry statistics were compared to 
the company’s actual performance. The third system measured trade sales and 
certain product lines against budgets and forecasts. Mr. Kastner also assisted 
in the installation of the publishers remote-batch order processing and inventory 
control system. All work was performed on a Honeywell system 2000 in COBOL.
Before starting those projects, Mr. Kastner participated in a failed project 
stabilization effort for the customer’s new order entry and inventory management system,
which had been prematurely placed in production. Once remediated, more that 100 days
of production had to be re-run so the company could meet its NYSE reporting obligations.

For a food products manufacturer [Ocean Spray Cranberries], Mr. Kastner participated as lead analyst in a study plan for the automation of the company's financial and accounts
system, including order entry, inventory control, invoicing, shipping and
sales analysis. Working with a user committee, he developed the functional
specifications for each application. A hardware evaluation selected a Burroughs B1700 computer with programs using Forte II and NDL, with TC500 intelligent terminals in four locations across the country. A telecommunications study chose the most cost-effective means of transmitting to remote sites. After the study was approved by company management, Mr. Kastner managed the development of detail application design specifications. He subsequently managed the implementation and installation of the five systems at plants across the country. The five applications were order entry, inventory control, shipping, invoicing and sales analysis. The system was complicated by government contract accounting, several kinds of promotional price discounting, and differences in raw and processed product accounting. Interfaces exist to accounts receivable, general ledger, material requirements and standard cost applications. The project required five man-years of effort.

Mr. Kastner designed, managed and assisted in the programming of a salesman incentive bonus system for a mutual insurance company [Mass Mutual]. The system applies a decision table to each category of sales and maintains a history of sales by salesman. A tanked transaction edit concept was used to store transactions during the month, prior to updating the system master files. Written in ANSI COBOL, the sales incentive system
runs on an IBM 370/135 under DOS/VS.
Mr. Kastner was the lead analyst responsible for the conceptualization,
functional specification and systems architecture design of an on-line
order processing and inventory control system for the American subsidiary
of a major Canadian telephone equipment manufacturer [Nortel]. The system was
designed to operate on an IBM 370/158 using CICS and a TOTAL database.
Six remote plants and warehouses were connected to the system. The
applications included order entry, inventory control, stock replenishment
accounts receivable and invoicing.
Mr. Kastner designed, implemented and installed the cost accounting module
in a basic accounting system for the Federal University Hospital [UFRJ] in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The system processes payroll, inventory and
other entries and reports on current and year-to-date expenses against
budget and prior periods. The cost system features a general ledger
subsystem which reports on all hospital revenue and expenses. Implemented
on a Burroughs B67OO in COBOL, the system runs daily with weekly, monthly
and annual reporting. The documentation includes extensive user procedures.
As technical leader for the Brazilian project, Mr. Kastner also contributed
to the design and implementation of a payroll/personnel and a patient
census system. He provided a year of remote and on-site customer support.

For an ADL client hospital in Brazil [UFRJ], Mr. Kastner directed the installa­tion 
of a hospital inventory control system. The system was converted
from a Burroughs B3500 to operate on a B6700 in a university environment.
He developed operations procedures, run-time job control and installed
the system. He managed the program changes necessary to tailor the system
to the Brazilian hospital environment, including manual methods and
procedures, and translation to Portuguese.

A well-known minicomputer manufacturer [Digital Equipment] required assistance in developing
a payroll/personnel system for the corporation. Mr. Kastner designed,
programmed, tested and installed an on-line inquiry and update program
which processes new hires, terminations, leaves of absence, and all
individual field changes. Running on a DEC-10 computer, the payroll/
personnel data base is protected by extensive restart and recovery
routines. All input and output are handled through conversational CRT
terminal methods including prompting. Each transaction is thoroughly
edited by the program using edit tables loaded from data files at run-time.
Mr. Kastner participated as senior software engineer in a study to determine
the requirements for a computer-assisted dispatching (CAD) system for the
Police Department of a major Florida city [St. Petersburg]. The study encompassed a site
survey, hardware and software evaluation and recommendations, functional
specifications, systems architecture specification, and a multi-phased
implementation plan with specific recommendations for grant funding
requests. He was responsible for performing the hardware and the
software evaluation. The city’s IBM 370/135 computer was determined
to be the most cost-effective means of implementing the system. The
software evaluation led to his recommendation of transferring a
dispatching system from another city [Hampton, VA], installing it under CICS, and
modifying the software. Mr. Kastner was a major contributor to the
other areas of the study.
Mr. Kastner was the major contributor to a study of the computer-assisted
dispatching requirements for a major Florida city [St. Petersburg] fire department. He
prepared functional specifications; hardware requirements analysis for
computer hardware, dispatcher terminals and mobile status terminals;
software estimates; and a five-year implementation plan. Fire dispatching,
in this case, differed from police dispatching in that specific fire
units are computer recommended based on a data base containing geographical
references and a pre-fire plan for every building in the city. Key
building data is transmitted to the mobile terminals while the fire
equipment is enroute to the fire.
Mr. Kastner managed the preparation of a proposal to an international
bank [Citibank] to automate world-wide funds transfers with a network of minicomputers.
The system had stringent reliability and availability requirements, which
required state-of-the-art hardware and control software. The application
processed funds transfers through a star network with interfaces to Federal
Reserve, CHIPS, SWIFT, Bankwire and the bank's own network of 250 overseas
branches. A complex database allowed current and historical transactions
access through multiple inverted indices.
For an ADL client, a Midwestern newspaper chain [Parade Magazine], Mr. Kastner
contributed to a study of the company’s business systems. He assisted as lead
analyst in defining applications which warranted automation, developing
an overall systems architecture, selecting a central computer system
and remote intelligent terminal hardware, and in establishing the company’s
data processing organization. He prepared functional specifications
for the priority applications and evaluated business systems software packages.

As vendor support manager, Mr. Kastner is responsible for the management
of our OEM relationship with Data General Corporation, Digital Equipment Corp., 
and Hewlett-Packard. He is responsible for minicomputer configuration manufacturability, hardware and 
software ordering and scheduling, customer site planning, and installation. He acts as
technical consultant on Data General products, including new product
evaluation.
As vendor support manager, Mr. Kastner contributed to the ADLS Public Safety 
Group’s projects. The company developed custom, fault-tolerant minicomputer systems 
for police dispatching (e.g., 911 calls)including Boston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, 
Aurora (CO), and St Petersburg (FL). Developed under federal funding and LEAA 
regulations, these systems typically used state-of-the-art mobile communications 
to police (and fire) units.
For a large science and engineering development company [American Science and Engineering],
Mr. Kastner led a team in auditing the FORTRAN source of a pioneering Computer-Aided 
Tomography (CAT)scanning product. This early hospital diagnostic tool took particular 
steps to avoid exposing patients to excess radiation in spite of any kind of system failure.
For an Arthur D. Little project, Mr. Kastner participated in a team writing FORTRAN programs
for a United States Navy ship design study [CASDOS].
Mr. Kastner has a secret clearance, and he serves as the Security Officer of ADLS.
Philip Hankins, Inc. (PHI)
Prior to joining ADLS, Mr. Kastner was a senior programmer/analyst
with the Professional Services division of PHI Computer Services, Inc., a 
subsidiary of Wang Laboratories.
Mr. Kastner converted an Accounts Receivable system from DOS COBOL to
OS/MVT on a 360/65. Several enhancements were made to the system to
link receivables with general ledger, provide additional cash control
and management reports. The conversion process included combining six
programs into two major processing modules. These new programs cut the
system operating costs by one half.
Mr. Kastner helped design, and later programmed, the internal accounting
system for PHI Computer Services, Inc. He developed interfaces to
proprietary and general ledger systems; programmed the contract status and
machine time accounting systems; designed and programmed a travel expense
accounting system; and programmed a labor cost system. All of these
systems were written in OS/360 COBOL to run on a large system 360 computer.
The machine-time accounting and contract status reporting systems were
programmed by Mr. Kastner. Based on reduced SMF data from a 360/65, the
machine accounting system bills CPU time; channel I/O time; disk storage;
tape, disk, card and printer time. Rates were based on job priority and
a complicated discount schedule. The contract status system bills
professional service labor and expenses on a contract basis. A common
invoice is prepared based on input from the machine time and contract
status systems.

For a large mid-Western bank [First Chicago], Mr. Kastner assisted in the design and
programming of a correspondent bank demand deposit accounting system.
Each of the fourteen correspondents had a custom-tailored application
based on run-time parameters and a flexible model application software.
The system language was COSMOS, a proprietary package which greatly
improves programmer productivity. Mr. Kastner programmed the interface to
an on-line check processing front-end, and the validation and update
portions of the DDA system.
Mr. Kastner designed and programmed a retail gas station accounting 
system for a chain of gas stations {Cumberland Farms]. Written in IBM COBOL, the system
processes dally cash transmittal forms which are proved to pump meter
readings. Periodic physical inventory double checks reported oil,
accessory and TBA sales. Weekly and monthly management reports are
produced to highlight sales trends.
For a regional bank [Marine Midland], Mr. Kastner designed and implemented application
changes to a bond portfolio analysis system, allowing 30-year bonds to be traded in
1970. This served as an early introduction to Year 2000 issues everyone faced
decades later.
Mr. Kastner designed modifications to the PHI Payroll package to allow
on-line batch entry and concurrent master file processing. The client,
a large commercial bank, had trouble meeting deadlines for its 460
customers with a strictly batch system. The design allowed for any
customer's payroll to be released for posting once a batch or batches
of timecards were entered and edited. To make the approach
work, significant problems in the areas of exclusive record access,
restart, and recovery had to be solved.
Mr. Kastner attended Cornell University and the University of California at Berkeley. 
He has formal training in project management, accounting, data base systems, 
control of material flow, and telecommunications.
Additionally, he has attended specialized courses sponsored by IBM,
Burroughs and Data General. He is a member of ACM.
