Memoir Scratch Pad

UFRJ
1 The UFRJ project called for ADL to provide hospital administration procedures including applications tailored to run on the universities Burroughs 6700 computer. Basically, ADL delivered manuals of procedures and the computer applications to administer a brand new 250 bid teaching hospital which had no staff.
 We came up with a terminal based design because the hospital was about 7 kilometers away from the university computer center at the design review the you have RJ administrators, who spoke English, hemmed and hawed but we eventually understood why we had to scrap the design. The proposed online terminals had to be paid for in U.S. dollars, and foreign exchange was a big problem for Brazil at that time. However, UFRJ had an answer for us: The application would be forms based, with batches of forms carried from the hospital to the computer center continually by new workers on bicycles paid the minimum wage this was social justice as it created jobs for the people near the favela (slum)  which the hospital was built  to support. Social justice in action.
We wrote the design documents in English and all of the application cobol code in English. Professional translators provided the proper documents for forms. The Burroughs 6700 was easy to use: much less grief than the IBM 360 for job control, for instance.
2 The manual labor on bicycles served as social purpose and was not different than what chase Manhattan bank was doing at the same time in New York except for the movement by bike.
3 The year of support… ohh the stories. Yes telex was used but it was not effective so I became an early Pan American frequent flyer making 3-4 overnight trips between Boston and Rio de Janeiro. Stayed in a hotel on the beach near Ipanema. took a taxi out to the university data center. There were a few bugs that were corrected and the last one turned out to be a system programming flaw. This took place in the ADL project off at the university. Our window air conditioner had been removed, and sweat dripped on my coding pad in the 104 degree heat.
the burroughs indexed sequential access method for cobol didn't work and I ended up writing a small program to prove that and brought the results back to Boston to get it fixed. One hitch was at the airport going home. Brazil is a very moral country and things like pornographic movies are strictly forbidden. however computer magnetic tapes are very sensitive and not designed for customs officers to pull the tape off the reel streaming onto the floor of the airport looking for the images of forbidden subjects. meanwhile I'm yelling in pigeon Portuguese that it's computer stuff and not anything else. eventually I retrieved the tape, wound it back up and could do nothing but take it back to Boston and hope it worked, and bless it the tape was still good. Remote support is a bitch.

4A Background: ADL initially told me to pack for an 18 month assignment in Rio. They actually unwittingly proposed leaving my wife in Boston for a year and a half. And the project needed two more COBOL programmers; my wife, Kate, was a COBOL programmer so a deal was made: we got less than two stipends. The third programmer was Barbara Kruesi, a volunteer from ADLS. The project leader was Hans Nijkamp, a Dutchman hired for the project. It did not occur to me that the project did not require Hans, who had to work hard to look busy, and that I was perfectly capable of managing the technology side. I was probably viewed as too young and risky to be on this overseas project as an unproven manager. The project was slated to run 18 months and include a pharmacy inventory system. That was replaced with a migration of a Minnesota hospital system. In late September, and without disclosed reason, the project was told to finish by year end. So we worked harder to meet that schedule. Overall, the project team spirit was not great as we had the commute, a do-nothing project leader, the due date, and the business culture differences.
4B. Life in Rio de Janeiro was generally great. The exception was the daily commute across town in rush hour traffic, horrific air pollution, and Boston-level drivers. The good-to-great parts included
    • Living a block from the famous Leblon beach in a furnished apartment. We hired a Portugese-speaking maid to cook and keep house. That forced our Portugese along. Plus the project funded a language instructor to work with us during lunch hour.
    • Weekend use of the project VW hatchback. Peter, Kate, and Barbara went every point on the compass in that reliable car. We also travelled to Belo Horizonte with a Brazilian-American, to San Paulo, Salvador da Bahia, and a long weekend in Manaus in the Amazon. On exiting Brazil, we departed through Foz do Iguaçu on the Paraguay/Brazil/Argentina border, Buenos Aires, Ecuador, and Peru.
    • The military junta made the streets very safe day and night. We took advantage of off-work hours in a sub-tropical area with bars, beaches, and friendly people. Moreover, there’s not just one girl from Ipanema, they’re thousands on the beaches every weekend.

The ADL Proposals
Adl consultants would often propose transformational projects at the C-level and get funding to do a functional specification. In retrospect, I was brought in on about ten of these design opportunities and absorbed a great deal about businesses I knew nothing about. Designing a new system meant going out to factories and laboratories to see production lines, talk with users, and tease out the ROI opportunities. Many were never implemented, yet I gained the knowledge of how that particular problem could be automated: Some of these from my resume include:
    • Ocean Spray Cranberries started as an ADL consulting assignment
    • CitiBank late-1970s minicomputer SWIFT funds transfer
    • Wisconsin electric: remote meter reading using AC voltage fluctuation at five baud to avoid a telephone line connect
    • Production system for Parade magazine, then a Sunday newspaper insert nationwide
    • Kraft paper manufacturing for Continental Forest Industries: trees to cardboard at thousands of feet per  second.
Houghton-Mifflin deserves its own section. A classic story never told. HM was a big Honeywell shop. They needed a new order-entry and inventory control system. After a long development effort and some testing, it was decided that it would be convenient to cut over to the new system on January 1st. New accounting year and all that. We got the call in the early spring and put together a 4-man COBOL team working onsite until the job was done. HM’s system was so flawed that bookstores were refusing to pay invoices and the physical inventory at warehouses by auditors failed. The most important bed news was HM could not close its books, and the clock was ticking before the company would have to tell the NYSE to suspend its stock. In short, hair-on fire catastrophe with massive, public implications. The job entailed debugging, one-off programs to repair files and accounts, and a lot of late nights. Then, another disaster: HM had so much processing that it was sending a teenager in a van to run cards, tapes and disks to Honeywell’s regional data center down Boston’s famous Route 128. The kid flipped the van. “Cleanup on Rt. 128.” Meanwhile, someone started calling in bomb threats. The first few cleared the building for hours. By the fifteenth, it was no big deal. You know, the team never got recognition or a big thank you for a heroic effort that turned out well. That’s the problem with big stories nobody wants out in the public.
The bottom line is all those ADL design proposals pumped an enormous amount of industry application knowledge into my experience which proved invaluable later in market planning and market research.

The Big Picture
The totality of my ten year career as a programmer-analyst involved a wide breadth of industries, vendors, architectures, and computer technologies. Add in all the stock market expertise I gained in personal use as well as assignments such as Chase Manhattan, made it possible for me to look at the computer industry as a whole. Virtually all other analysts focused on a particular company or technology area. I could explain trends and how they impacted specific industries, or particular vendors’ product architectures. I had the experience and confidence to take it all on. In that I was unique, and I didn’t quite realize that until well into my Aberdeen career.

Junior Programmer at PHI
I was quite surprised to learn the high respect for Philip Hankins, Inc. (PHI) while researching my memoirs 55 years later. I never knew at the time that Hankins himself programmed parts of the Apollo moon project navigation system, which means I was truly working with rocket scientists.
I started as a junior programmer at PHI in March 1969 at a salary of $7,200 a year. A modest start but I was now a programmer at a professional services company with a data center. The computer operations career was behind me.
I quickly learned while watching customer printouts scroll by that I was not doing too badly: a study of bank officer titles and salaries informed me that many bank vice presidents earned in the $6,500 range. Lessoned Learned: titles are cheap.
I was hired to fix the PHI internal accounting system (see ADL bio), which was costing the company thousands of dollars a month in internal computer time charges. Lesson 1: computer time was $360 per CPU hour. In other words, 20 hours of computer time was equal to my annual pay. Computer time was precious and programmer time (human labor) was not. That equation is completely reversed today, of course, but for today we’re back in the 1960s reality.
PHI’s longstanding customer billing algorithm charged customers by CPU usage inside the application. Eventually, it was realized that the IBM System 360 MVT operating system was consuming a significant amount of billable CPU time running its own tasks and, in particular, user program input-output calls to the OS. Another problem was job step overhead; fewer steps cost less. One of the prime offenders was the PHI internal accounting system, a kluge of six COBOL programs and a Cosmos/CAS application. I was hired to optimize those programs to lower computing costs in the new computer-time billing algorithm which charged customers for I/O calls. Nobody in PHI professional services wanted to touch the code, so I was the luck new hire to get the job. It took about three months to shuffle and glue the six programs into two programs with internal sorts. Along the way, the wonderful data center systems programmers taught me a career’s worth of job control language, I/O minimization, dump reading, and other tricks of the trade. It was an invaluable apprentice’s opportunity on how to be good at the job. 
Apprenticeship was about the only way to learn more, especially practical technology. Things like setting a switch in a single instruction with no memory (slow!) reference. Literally, the tools of the trade were:
    • IBM System 360 reference card—assembler instructions
    • Coding forms for each computer language
    • Plastic templates for making flowcharts. (Sorry, no Visio then)
Moreover, there were no databases, no project management or estimating tools, no debugging aids besides a memory dump, no application libraries or tools except ones you made yourself. And you got one, maybe two computer jobs run in prime shift a day. This made night shift work particularly attractive for productivity through turnarounds.
It’s true. I see programmers today whip up a bunch of code and compile it without a glance, fix the compile problems, and try a unit test. Given the precious nature of computer time, my programmer generation always spent time looking for the keyboard error before the job was run.
After 90 days as a junior programmer (and no doubt whose performance was carefully watched), I was invited to join the PHI professional services division as a programmer/analyst.

