PETER S. KASTNER Professional Biography (1979)
Mr. Kastner is a senior member of the staff of Arthur D. Little Systems, Inc., 
a division of Arthur D. Little, Inc. His responsibilities include systems design 
and implementation, project planning and management, and computer systems 
consulting assignments. While primarily specialized in many aspects of business 
systems, he is also experienced in law enforcement, hospital administration, accounting,
real-time systems, and minicomputer sizing, selection and procurement.
A large international bank [Chase Manhattan] required design consulting and implementation
expertise for a massive trust securities handling system. Mr. Kastner
managed and acted as lead designer of the securities subsystem.
He assisted in the design of the client account and conversion subsystems.
During the project implementation, Mr. Kastner managed and acted as chief
programmer for the securities subsystem. The application used the
COSMOS application management package to minimize development time.
Once converted, an IBM 360/65 processed 174,000 unique securities held
by over 25,000 trust clients with a combined value of over $10 billion [1975]. The 
securities subsystem manages these securities, producing sixty accounting, 
customer and management infor­mation reports. The project was done under severe time 
constraints as the existing punch-card-based system literally ran out of spare parts 
to keep it running. Using COSMOS, Mr. Kastner and another programmer had 25 million 
lines of debugged COBOL code ready in under a year.

Mr. Kastner designed, programmed and installed three sales analysis
systems for a major publisher [Houghton Mifflin]. One system grouped product sales by
geographic region in order to measure textbook acceptance at individual colleges. 
The second system analyzed company sales and produced detailed reports for a 
publisher's association. The aggregated industry statistics were compared to 
the company’s actual performance. The third system measured trade sales and 
certain product lines against budgets and forecasts. Mr. Kastner also assisted 
in the installation of the publishers remote-batch order processing and inventory 
control system. All work was performed on a Honeywell system 2000 in COBOL.
Before starting those projects, Mr. Kastner participated in a failed project 
stabilization effort for the customer’s new order entry and inventory management system,
which had been prematurely placed in production. Once remediated, more that 100 days
of production had to be re-run so the company could meet its NYSE reporting obligations.

For a food products manufacturer [Ocean Spray Cranberries], Mr. Kastner participated as lead analyst in a study plan for the automation of the company's financial and accounts
system, including order entry, inventory control, invoicing, shipping and
sales analysis. Working with a user committee, he developed the functional
specifications for each application. A hardware evaluation selected a Burroughs B1700 computer with programs using Forte II and NDL, with TC500 intelligent terminals in four locations across the country. A telecommunications study chose the most cost-effective means of transmitting to remote sites. After the study was approved by company management, Mr. Kastner managed the development of detail application design specifications. He subsequently managed the implementation and installation of the five systems at plants across the country. The five applications were order entry, inventory control, shipping, invoicing and sales analysis. The system was complicated by government contract accounting, several kinds of promotional price discounting, and differences in raw and processed product accounting. Interfaces exist to accounts receivable, general ledger, material requirements and standard cost applications. The project required five man-years of effort.

Mr. Kastner designed, managed and assisted in the programming of a salesman incentive bonus system for a mutual insurance company [Mass Mutual]. The system applies a decision table to each category of sales and maintains a history of sales by salesman. A tanked transaction edit concept was used to store transactions during the month, prior to updating the system master files. Written in ANSI COBOL, the sales incentive system
runs on an IBM 370/135 under DOS/VS.
Mr. Kastner was the lead analyst responsible for the conceptualization,
functional specification and systems architecture design of an on-line
order processing and inventory control system for the American subsidiary
of a major Canadian telephone equipment manufacturer [Nortel]. The system was
designed to operate on an IBM 370/158 using CICS and a TOTAL database.
Six remote plants and warehouses were connected to the system. The
applications included order entry, inventory control, stock replenishment
accounts receivable and invoicing.
Mr. Kastner designed, implemented and installed the cost accounting module
in a basic accounting system for the Federal University Hospital [UFRJ] in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The system processes payroll, inventory and
other entries and reports on current and year-to-date expenses against
budget and prior periods. The cost system features a general ledger
subsystem which reports on all hospital revenue and expenses. Implemented
on a Burroughs B67OO in COBOL, the system runs daily with weekly, monthly
and annual reporting. The documentation includes extensive user procedures.
As technical leader for the Brazilian project, Mr. Kastner also contributed
to the design and implementation of a payroll/personnel and a patient
census system. He provided a year of remote and on-site customer support.

For an ADL client hospital in Brazil [UFRJ], Mr. Kastner directed the installa­tion 
of a hospital inventory control system. The system was converted
from a Burroughs B3500 to operate on a B6700 in a university environment.
He developed operations procedures, run-time job control and installed
the system. He managed the program changes necessary to tailor the system
to the Brazilian hospital environment, including manual methods and
procedures, and translation to Portuguese.

A well-known minicomputer manufacturer [Digital Equipment] required assistance in developing
a payroll/personnel system for the corporation. Mr. Kastner designed,
programmed, tested and installed an on-line inquiry and update program
which processes new hires, terminations, leaves of absence, and all
individual field changes. Running on a DEC-10 computer, the payroll/
personnel data base is protected by extensive restart and recovery
routines. All input and output are handled through conversational CRT
terminal methods including prompting. Each transaction is thoroughly
edited by the program using edit tables loaded from data files at run-time.
Mr. Kastner participated as senior software engineer in a study to determine
the requirements for a computer-assisted dispatching (CAD) system for the
Police Department of a major Florida city [St. Petersburg]. The study encompassed a site
survey, hardware and software evaluation and recommendations, functional
specifications, systems architecture specification, and a multi-phased
implementation plan with specific recommendations for grant funding
requests. He was responsible for performing the hardware and the
software evaluation. The city’s IBM 370/135 computer was determined
to be the most cost-effective means of implementing the system. The
software evaluation led to his recommendation of transferring a
dispatching system from another city [Hampton, VA], installing it under CICS, and
modifying the software. Mr. Kastner was a major contributor to the
other areas of the study.
Mr. Kastner was the major contributor to a study of the computer-assisted
dispatching requirements for a major Florida city [St. Petersburg] fire department. He
prepared functional specifications; hardware requirements analysis for
computer hardware, dispatcher terminals and mobile status terminals;
software estimates; and a five-year implementation plan. Fire dispatching,
in this case, differed from police dispatching in that specific fire
units are computer recommended based on a data base containing geographical
references and a pre-fire plan for every building in the city. Key
building data is transmitted to the mobile terminals while the fire
equipment is enroute to the fire.
Mr. Kastner managed the preparation of a proposal to an international
bank [Citibank] to automate world-wide funds transfers with a network of minicomputers.
The system had stringent reliability and availability requirements, which
required state-of-the-art hardware and control software. The application
processed funds transfers through a star network with interfaces to Federal
Reserve, CHIPS, SWIFT, Bankwire and the bank's own network of 250 overseas
branches. A complex database allowed current and historical transactions
access through multiple inverted indices.
For an ADL client, a Midwestern newspaper chain [Parade Magazine], Mr. Kastner
contributed to a study of the company’s business systems. He assisted as lead
analyst in defining applications which warranted automation, developing
an overall systems architecture, selecting a central computer system
and remote intelligent terminal hardware, and in establishing the company’s
data processing organization. He prepared functional specifications
for the priority applications and evaluated business systems software packages.

As vendor support manager, Mr. Kastner is responsible for the management
of our OEM relationship with Data General Corporation, Digital Equipment Corp., 
and Hewlett-Packard. He is responsible for minicomputer configuration manufacturability, hardware and 
software ordering and scheduling, customer site planning, and installation. He acts as
technical consultant on Data General products, including new product
evaluation.
As vendor support manager, Mr. Kastner contributed to the ADLS Public Safety 
Group’s projects. The company developed custom, fault-tolerant minicomputer systems 
for police dispatching (e.g., 911 calls)including Boston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, 
Aurora (CO), and St Petersburg (FL). Developed under federal funding and LEAA 
regulations, these systems typically used state-of-the-art mobile communications 
to police (and fire) units.
For a large science and engineering development company [American Science and Engineering],
Mr. Kastner led a team in auditing the FORTRAN source of a pioneering Computer-Aided 
Tomography (CAT)scanning product. This early hospital diagnostic tool took particular 
steps to avoid exposing patients to excess radiation in spite of any kind of system failure.
For an Arthur D. Little project, Mr. Kastner participated in a team writing FORTRAN programs
for a United States Navy ship design study [CASDOS].
Mr. Kastner has a secret clearance, and he serves as the Security Officer of ADLS.
Philip Hankins, Inc. (PHI)
Prior to joining ADLS, Mr. Kastner was a senior programmer/analyst
with the Professional Services division of PHI Computer Services, Inc., a 
subsidiary of Wang Laboratories.
Mr. Kastner converted an Accounts Receivable system from DOS COBOL to
OS/MVT on a 360/65. Several enhancements were made to the system to
link receivables with general ledger, provide additional cash control
and management reports. The conversion process included combining six
programs into two major processing modules. These new programs cut the
system operating costs by one half.
Mr. Kastner helped design, and later programmed, the internal accounting
system for PHI Computer Services, Inc. He developed interfaces to
proprietary and general ledger systems; programmed the contract status and
machine time accounting systems; designed and programmed a travel expense
accounting system; and programmed a labor cost system. All of these
systems were written in OS/360 COBOL to run on a large system 360 computer.
The machine-time accounting and contract status reporting systems were
programmed by Mr. Kastner. Based on reduced SMF data from a 360/65, the
machine accounting system bills CPU time; channel I/O time; disk storage;
tape, disk, card and printer time. Rates were based on job priority and
a complicated discount schedule. The contract status system bills
professional service labor and expenses on a contract basis. A common
invoice is prepared based on input from the machine time and contract
status systems.

For a large mid-Western bank [First Chicago], Mr. Kastner assisted in the design and
programming of a correspondent bank demand deposit accounting system.
Each of the fourteen correspondents had a custom-tailored application
based on run-time parameters and a flexible model application software.
The system language was COSMOS, a proprietary package which greatly
improves programmer productivity. Mr. Kastner programmed the interface to
an on-line check processing front-end, and the validation and update
portions of the DDA system.
Mr. Kastner designed and programmed a retail gas station accounting 
system for a chain of gas stations {Cumberland Farms]. Written in IBM COBOL, the system
processes dally cash transmittal forms which are proved to pump meter
readings. Periodic physical inventory double checks reported oil,
accessory and TBA sales. Weekly and monthly management reports are
produced to highlight sales trends.
For a regional bank [Marine Midland], Mr. Kastner designed and implemented application
changes to a bond portfolio analysis system, allowing 30-year bonds to be traded in
1970. This served as an early introduction to Year 2000 issues everyone faced
decades later.
Mr. Kastner designed modifications to the PHI Payroll package to allow
on-line batch entry and concurrent master file processing. The client,
a large commercial bank, had trouble meeting deadlines for its 460
customers with a strictly batch system. The design allowed for any
customer's payroll to be released for posting once a batch or batches
of timecards were entered and edited. To make the approach
work, significant problems in the areas of exclusive record access,
restart, and recovery had to be solved.
Mr. Kastner attended Cornell University and the University of California at Berkeley. 
He has formal training in project management, accounting, data base systems, 
control of material flow, and telecommunications.
Additionally, he has attended specialized courses sponsored by IBM,
Burroughs and Data General. He is a member of ACM.
