SOURCE_URL: http://www.informationweek.com/644/44iusbr.htm;jsessionid=QRCIIVADGX0LMQSNDLRSKHSCJUNN2JVN
MIME: text/html

--> Sabre's Challenge InformationWeek.com / TOP POP UP AD 1 of 2 --> /SUPERNAV --> Welcome Guest. | Log In | Register | Membership Benefits United Business Media --> InformationWeek Defining The Business Value Of Technology Part of the TechWeb Business Technology Network --> New Image Galleries: The Nokia N810 Linux Internet Tablet Doesn't Make Sense Vote: Dubious Dweeb, Courageous Crusader, Or Tech Terrorist? --> Apple's iPhone Rules Wal-Mart's Linux Retreat --> / take IW with you promo --> / mobile promo --> / iw500 promo wide --> --> --> --> --> --> --> Get News On Your Phone --> RSS Feeds Subscribe Events Digital Library News Blogs Software Security Hardware Mobility Windows Internet Global CIO Government Careers --> August 18, 1997 Sabre's Challenge Reservations group adds new apps to its mainframe core to win customers By John Foley abre Group Holdings Inc., best known for its huge travel reservation system, faces a big challenge. Spun off as a public company late last year by parent AMR Corp., Sabre needs to expand its software offerings to attract new customers and accelerate its sluggish growth-not an easy task when its chief asset is a monolithic, 25-year-old transaction-processing system. Sabre's answer: It's developing new client-server applications, many of which surround and work with its core reservations software. The strategy seems to be winning new customers. AMR's American Airlines is still Sabre's biggest customer, but revenue from unaffiliated companies increased to 69% last year, from 58% two years earlier. Aiming Higher But improved revenue growth is proving more elusive. For the first six months of 1997, revenue grew just 6.6%, to $887 million, compared with the same period a year ago, while net earnings increased 10.5% (both figures are adjusted to reflect July 1996 contracts with American Airlines). Sabre is aiming far higher-revenue growth of 15% to 25% a year, says Thomas Cook, president of Sabre's Technology Solutions unit. That means Sabre needs to focus even more on attracting business outside AMR affiliates, which provide steady, but modest, revenue increases. "The challenge is to grow the external business," says Cook. Sabre's spinoff last October as a public company-it's still majority- owned by AMR, in Dallas/Fort Worth Airport, Texas-was intended as a step toward that g oal. The idea was to push Sabre to become more competitive with other reservation networks such as Amadeus/System One, Galileo/ Apollo, and Worldspan-each owned by an airline consortium-and to build new software and services businesses. Sabre now has two major units. Sabre Travel Information Network handles its core reservations system and related products, such as the Planet Sabre client software for travel agents. Sabre Technology Solutions develops other software, manages Sabre's Tulsa, Okla., data center, and provides consulting and outsourcing. Sabre is also venturing onto the Web with efforts such as the Travelocity travel reservations site. This year has seen several big wins that suggest Sabre is making headway. In June, Sabre and IBM announced a 10-year agreement to develop systems for Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways. In April, Sabre won part of a $140 million contract to provide software for airlines in the former Soviet Union. American Airlines continues to be Sabre's biggest customer, thou gh. Last year, American awarded Sabre a 10-year, $3.8 billion outsourcing pact for software development, maintenance, and other services. Forced To Diversify Like competing reservation system providers, Sabre must diversify because the reservations market is flattening, says Patricia Coates, editor of Travel Distribution Report, an industry newsletter in Rockville, Md. "The market will top out because there's only going to be so many travel agents," she says. In the United States, Sabre Group supports more travel agency locations (15,600) and terminals (80,700) than its competitors. It ranks in the top three worldwide. Fierce competition claimed one casualty last year when TransQuest Inc. in Atlanta decided it would not compete with Sabre Technology Solutions. TransQuest was formed by Delta and AT&T in January 1995 to sell software and services to airlines. But AT&T backed out last year, and TransQuest retreated to focus on providing IT support to Delta. "Sabre was in this space six to eight years ahead of anybody else," says TransQuest spokesman Chris Stellwag. "They're not the only ones out there, but they are the biggest game in town." As part owner of Worldspan, Delta continues to compete with Sabre in the reservation systems market. Other competitors are emerging. In July, American Express and Microsoft announced a travel reservation package for businesses, American Express Interactive, that competes with a similar Sabre product called Business Travel Solutions. Microsoft's Web site for travelers, Expedia, aims at the same audience as Sabre's Travelocity site. Sabre, meanwhile, is looking outside the airline industry for much of its growth. It moved into the hospitality industry last year, teaming with Computer Sciences Corp. to develop software for Hyatt Hotels. In partnership with the French national railroad, Sabre has developed decision-support and scheduling systems for railways in France and other European countries. Sabre also signed a 10-year contract to provide sc heduling systems for London's subway system. "We didn't have a subway- or crew-scheduling system, so we're building one from scratch using some of the same technologies and techniques we use in airlines," says Cook. Sabre is also offering software, systems integration, and outsourcing to financial firms, manufacturers, and oil and gas companies. Sabre is also working on some new technology deployments, including a yield-management system for Air France that uses Versant Object Technology Corp.'s object-oriented database and Sun Microsystems servers. The system, which works alongside a Unisys mainframe, helps Air France increase revenue for each flight by calculating fares in less than a second, based on seat availability and other factors. One analyst has called the project a "landmark event" in the use of object-oriented databases. But Sabre Group's bread and butter is still the core reservation system that gave the company its name. Introduced in 1963 as the Semi-Automated Business Research Environm ent, the Sabre reservation system runs on IBM's Transaction Processing Facility (TPF), a specialized mainframe operating environment. The system holds 4 terabytes of information, including data on 400 airlines, 50 car rental companies, and 35,000 hotels. At peak demand, it handles more than 5,200 messages a second. Last year, Sabre processed 350 million reservations with an average transaction time of under two seconds. The aging system may be immensely powerful-but it's also inflexible and expensive to operate. TPF is adept at handling reservations, but "adding new applications is problematic," says Peter Kastner, an analyst with the Aberdeen Group, a consulting firm in Boston. "For a long time, we've wanted to migrate out of the TPF environment in order to reduce the time to market and cost of building products," says Cook. "We haven't figured out a way to do that yet." To get around those limitations, Sabre Group is developing what company officials call next-generation Sabre, which provides an IT approach for creating reservations-related businesses. Next-generation Sabre involves surrounding the core transaction-processing engine with high-performance, special-purpose systems. "The answer is to subset the problem," says Terrell Jones, Sabre Group's CIO and president of Sabre Interactive, which manages the Travelocity site. Quick Adds Travelocity is a case in point. The site runs on a Unix-based Silicon Graphics server and an Oracle database, a setup that lets Sabre add new features quickly. Travelocity can page a subscriber when flights are delayed or send an electronic message when airfares drop. Both features were added after the site began operating. For airline reservations, Travelocity communicates directly with the Sabre reservation system. A million users have signed up with Travelocity in the past 12 months. Seema Chowdhury, an analyst with Forrester Research in Cambridge, Mass., estimates that Travelocity generates $1.5 million a week in revenue, placing it among the four top travel-industry Web sites. The market is growing fast: Forrester estimates that online travel bookings will grow from $654 million this year to $7.4 billion in 2001. In another example of the surround approach, Sabre uses Windows NT-based Digital Equipment servers running Microsoft's SQL Server database as a middle tier to support Business Travel Solutions, which was introduced last October. The package includes an electronic booking tool that taps into Sabre so users can purchase airline tickets directly. About 25 companies are deploying the applications. A third next-generation Sabre project involves moving an existing fare-quoting system from a mainframe to a client-server system. Sabre is also building decision-support systems that can analyze revenue opportunities. One project is to develop a data warehouse to help American determine the number and types of airplanes it needs, and set prices and flight schedules. The software takes into account millions of combinations of departures and arrivals as well as times and locations, including those of competing airlines. "You need to understand the impact of your changes on the world's entire travel transportation network," says Brad Jensen, a Sabre Technology Solutions VP. Sabre plans to use Informix Software Inc.'s object-relational Universal Server for the warehouse because of its support for user- defined data types. Sabre Group developers will create object-oriented data types for complex algorithms, such as revenue passenger miles and available seat miles, which can be embedded in the database for high-speed calculations. The warehouse, which is slated to begin operating early next year, is expected to grow to 3 terabytes in its first year, says Jensen. That type of sophisticated yield- management system may find a broader market as Web commerce increases the price competition in all industries, says CIO Jones. Analyst Kastner agrees and notes Sabre's expertise in a key area: "They try to milk every dollar out of every seat." Sabre hopes that's one skill that will attract business in an increasingly competitive market. Back to News in Review Send Us Your Feedback Top of the Page --> CAREER CENTER Looking for a new job? Open | Close Employers: Give your recruitment message influence. Advertise in the InformationWeek 500 . --> SEARCH Function: Information Technology Engineering Keyword(s): State: Post Your Resume Employers Area News & Features Blogs & Forums Career Resources Browse By: State | City SPONSOR RECENT JOB POSTINGS BTG - Now Hiring --> Featured Jobs: Boeing seeking Software Engineer 1 in Anaheim, CA Switch and Data seeking Site Facility Technician in Sunnyvale, CA New York Life seeking Insurance and Investment Sales in Schaumburg, IL Washington State Investment Board seeking IT Specialist in Olympia, WA Kforce seeking VA Mortgage Processors in Phoenix, AZ For more great jobs, career-related news, features and services, please visit our Career Center . CAREER NEWS Companies Looking To Hire CIO 2.0 After months of gloom and doom, companies are again hiring new CIOs. Minorities, Women Underrepresented In IT According to reports, minorities are underrepresented in high-technology companies. More articles from our career center Today's Top News China Making Green Dam Internet Filter Optional Sun Dropping Rock Chip Project, Says Report MySpace Cuts 30% Of Workforce AT&T Axes Prepaid iPhone 3G Plans Microsoft Sues Three For Click Fraud Opera Browser Becomes File Sharing Platform --> See Image Galleries Specialty Resources Check out the NEW Service Management Center The Threat of modern day Malware Mitigate Risk, Meet Compliance Requirements, in one spot Building a Business Case for BPM with SOA ROI Virtualizing File Systems VIEW ALL BRIEFING CENTERS Featured Microsite InformationWeek Marketplace (Sponsored Links) Is Your Database Safe? Free Database Security Gui... Get the 10 Best Practices for Database Security. Download FREE Guide Now from Application Security. Kaplan University Online Degrees in IT Free Program Info! Get Your Degree in Information Technology 100% Online! Learn More Today! Advertise With Us InformationWeek Home News Windows Security Mobility Internet Software Hardware CIO Central Research & Tools Careers Become A Member/Membership Benefits About Us Contact Us Current Issue Back Issues White Papers Briefing Centers Site Map Advertising Contacts Technology Marketing Solutions Editorial Calendar Other Techweb Sites: Informationweek Germany Network Computing TechWeb Intelligent Enterprise Dark Reading Light Reading Byte & Switch Internet Evolution bMighty out.println(" Small Biz Resource "); Insurance & Technology Wall Street & Technology Bank Systems & Technology Advanced Trading --> Terms of Service | Privacy Statement | Copyright © 2009 United Business Media LLC, All rights reserved. --> --> / TOP POP UP AD 2 of 2 -->