[Slide 1]
Dell Services
Discussion Materials
5/19/2004

Peter Kastner
Executive VP - Research
AberdeenGroupBoston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins

[Slide 2]
Market-wide Point of View
Service organizations just beginning a major cost restructuring a la U.S. manufacturing 30 years ago
IT service sector particularly affected as buyers demand that their service providers arbitrage labor, collaborate, decrease overall cost and improve value proposition
Buyer dissatisfaction with IT service providers still high
Companies seeking to find lower cost resources themselves
Integrators seeing no movement in large, long timeframe work
CXO discomfort with value propositions of IT service providers
Larger providers and ERP vendors re-discovering all-inclusive hosted solutions as the means to deliver value, flexibility, transformation and scalable solutions
[Slide 3]
Key Professional Service Org. Issues
Appropriate support for global clients now that more clients than ever are global
Offshore labor arbitrage
Bench optimization
Marketing of services
The virtuous cycle: Bench strength, intellectual property, marketing
BPO/On Demand/etc. – New account control mechanisms that adversely affect many service providers
Motivation of consulting staff now that careers aren’t what they used to be
[Slide 4]
Drivers
Stack wars – 
Fast, complete, scalable, transforming solutions not software or hardware
Account control slipping away from technology component providers and over to large integrators offering new breed solutions (e.g., Microsoft -> IBM)
Global restructuring of service operations
Rise of Linux
Transform business processes with Internet services
Make vs. Buy transition going back to ‘make’
Buyers have to have more value and more commoditization
[Slide 5]
Threats
Commoditization of services
Commoditization of software
Commoditization of hardware
Linux
HP
IBM
Europe and Asia ABM
[Slide 6]
Services Evolution in Technology Firms
Embrace every possible partner in country to expedite sales of product
Use partners to sell, install and support products
Get partners and initial customers to localize solutions
On-site service personnel negligible
Formalize partner program and begin to cull out marginal or low performing partners
Begin hiring of in-country pre-sales and post sales services personnel
Restrict service roles to deep technical/product support only. Partners still sell and run projects.
Significantly build out size of service organization
Assume more control of client implementations to better ensure delivery of benefits & value 
Dramatically cull the number of partners. Only retain those that are 100% committed to you.
Drop most partners save those with extraordinary, complimentary capabilities. Drop most tactical partners and focus energies on partners that are developing add-on modules, products.
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Where is Dell in this continuum?
[Slide 7]

[Slide 8]


Magnitude of Effort on Customer
Nature of Project
Tactical
Strategic

Low
Great



Traditional Implementations 
BPO/BTO

Hosted Apps
Upgrades

Tech Support
Strategic Consulting
Services Ecosystem
[Slide 9]

Risk
Nature of Solution
Tactical
Strategic

Low
High



Service Partner Behaviors Tied to Solution Focus

Package
Custom
OR
Tactical Partners
Sell and install the basics 
Should be focused on lowering TCO for customers.
Are highly interchangeable
Often possess similar skills as Dell Services personnel
Strategic Partners
Design & sell all new solutions
Extend technologies to create new apps
Create new markets
Focus on client ROI not TCO
Complement not repeat Dell skill sets
Deep industry knowledge