URL: http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,663386,00.asp

The Death of the CRT Monitor - News and Analysis by PC Magazine 

 DIGITAL CAMERAS 

 LAPTOPS 

 MP3 PLAYERS 

 CELL PHONES 

 PRINTERS 

 DESKTOPS 

 HDTVs 

 Software 

 MORE > 

 Sign In | Register | My Account 

 AD: 

 Get Your Game On! Dell XPS 730x 

 HOME 

 REVIEWS 

 DOWNLOADS 

 SOLUTIONS 

 NEWS 

 COLUMNS 

 COMPARE PRICES 

 FORUMS 

 @WORK 

 BLOGS 

 VIDEO 

 SUBSCRIBE 

 Special Reports Show Reports Front Side 

  Search PCMAG.COM NEWS 

Product Guides

 Antispyware Software Multi-Function Printers 

 Antivirus Software Netbooks 

 Apple Coverage PDAs 

 Backup Software Photo Printers 

 Browsers Plasma Displays 

 Cars Projectors 

 Computer & Console Gaming Robots 

 Digital Camcorders Scanners 

 Digital Imaging Software Security Software 

 DVD Authoring Software Small Business 

 External Hard Drives Software 

 Flash Drives Speakers 

 GPS Utilities 

 High-Definition Players Video Editing Software 

 HDTVs VoIP 

 Ink Jet Printers Windows Vista 

 Laser Printers Windows XP 

 LCDs Wireless Networking 

 View All > 

 Home > 

 News and Analysis > 

The Death of the CRT Monitor

News and Analysis

-->

 Related Links

 Displays Product Guide 

news

6.16.2009
 Microsoft Names Three in 'Click Fraud' Suit 

6.16.2009
 Obama's FCC Pick Touts Broadband, Competition 

6.16.2009
 D-Link Launches Second-Gen Green Switches 

6.16.2009
 AT&T, Verizon Deny Text-Message Price Fixing 

6.16.2009
 Quicken Offers Discounts to Lure MS Money Users 
 View All 

ultimate utility guide

 2009 Windows Utility Guide 

 DiskJunction: Find, Create, and Delete Symbolic Links 

 Startup Cop Pro 4: Control Windows Startup 

 Vista Logon Changer: Personalize Your Windows Bootup 

 What's Going On?: A One-Stop Spot for Vital System Stats 
 View All 

 Cell Phones 
 Desktops 
 Digital Cameras 
 GPS Devices 
 Headphones 
 HDTVs 
 Laptops 
 LCDs 
 Netbooks 
 Printers 
 Security Software 
 All categories 

top sellers

Compare Store Deals

 The Death of the CRT Monitor

11.01.02

 Total posts: 15 

 by Cade Metz 

Last week, Lance Ulanoff , senior executive producer of PCMag.com, posted a note on the site's Discussions page , asking readers when the flat-panel LCD would finally replace the tried-and-true CRT monitor. "Flat panels have gotten bigger and cheaper (notwithstanding the $1,000-plus, 19-inch Princeton LCD we recently reviewed) and they're beginning to pop up like dandelions on desktops everywhere," Ulanoff wrote. "Are you seeing the same thing? Is your company replacing old CRTs with LCDs? Let's try to predict the date that we will officially declare the CRT deceased."

More than 25 readers responded, voicing a predictably diverse array of opinions. Some said LCDs are still a long way from maturity, claiming that they are not yet cheap enough—or effective enough—to replace CRTs. "The discussion at my work (public-school district) is about retiring the last i386's and Apple IIc's from the elementary schools and replacing them with Pentium II and III systems from the high schools," wrote Nick Nielsen. "LCD monitors? Not until we reach price parity." Others believe the LCD's time has come, arguing that it not only saves space, it's also easier on the eyes. "I wouldn't purchase a new computer unless it has an LCD," wrote another reader, using the online handle Lydiamc6 . "I just like the quality better."

So what's the answer? When will we see the death of the CRT?

According to industry analysts, sales of CRTs still exceed those of LCDs. Peter Kastner, a vice president and senior researcher officer with market research firm Aberdeen Group , says that LCDs account for only 40 percent of the desktop display market, with roughly 2 million units sold per month. But such figures may be slightly high. Rhonda Alexander, an analyst with iSuppli/Stanford Resources, a research firm that focused solely on the electronic-display market, puts LCD market share at around 29 percent.

Both analysts agree, however, that LCD market share is steadily growing. According to Alexander's research, it grew from 3 percent in the first quarter of 2000 to 5 percent in early 2001 to 21 percent in January of this year. Both analysts also agree that buyers are already spending more money on LCD monitors than CRTs. Kastner puts LCD sales at $800 million a month, with roughly 2 million displays selling for an average price of $400 each. In 2003, they say, we'll finally see LCDs outnumber CRTs as the standard monitor sold with PCs. 

"I see room for phenomenal growth for the LCD market in the coming year, because as LCD prices continue to drop, there's been relatively flat growth in the PC market as a whole," says Alexander. "CRT prices are also dropping but not nearly as fast."

Does that mean that CRTs will soon be phased out entirely? Not necessarily. LCDs still can't handle full-motion video as well as CRTs. "Because there's often a latency when it comes to displaying full-motion video on an LCD, games freaks and DVD aficionados are going to quibble with the picture and probably will stick with CRTs for the time being," says Kastner. Rob Baumgartner, a product manager with Planar Systems, a large LCD manufacturer, agrees that this is a problem with today's LCDs but says that Planar and other manufacturers are working to correct it. 

"There are still issues with watching movies or video clips on the Internet, but response time is getting better and better," says Baumgartner. Some users also complain that certain LCDs are hard to view from tight angles, but this situation continues to improve. Thomas Murtha and Stephanie Ann Lenway, two professors at the University of Minnesota's Carlson School of Management, recently published a book dealing with LCD displays, Managing New Industry Creation: Global Knowledge Formation and Entreprenuership in High Technology . Murtha and Lenway feel that the best LCDs are in no way inferior to CRTs. "By 2006," says Lenway. "LCDs will outnumber CRTs by 5 to 1."

 -->

 Buzz up! 
  Mixx It 
  Digg It 

 More... 

 Add PC Magazine Breaking News RSS feed to your feed reader so that you don't miss another headline!

 More Readers 
 Bloglines 
 Rojo 
 Newsgator 
 Pluck 

 What is this? 

 See all tech RSS feeds 

 Computer Monitor Reviews 

Computer Monitor Reviews Analyzed, with Ratings and Price Comparisons

 www.ConsumerSearch.com 

 LCD Flat panels on Sale 

20-70% off great LCD Flat Panels. Entire order ships for just $1!

 Overstock.com 

 Dell Monitor Deals 

Save on UltraSharp Dell Monitors. Visit Dell & Save on Great Deals!

 www.Dell.com 

 Top Rated HDTVs for 2009 

1080p High Definition Televisions - Owner Reviews. 2009 Buying Guide.

 www.smart-review.com/HDTV 

 HP dv2700t Notebook PC 

HP Official Store - Save Big on HP dv2700t Entertainment Notebooks.

 www.shopping.hp.com 

newsletters

Get PCMag.com's FREE email newsletters delivered to your inbox.

It's easy, just follow the steps.

Want more? Check out our other newsletters 
 here .

 Manage your newsletter 
 subscriptions here .

1. Make your selections:

 Daily News Alert 

 Inside PCMag.com 

 PCMag.com Small Business Update 

 PCMagCast Update 

 Productwire: First Looks Update 

 Security Watch 

 Tech Saver 

 Tip of the Day 

 Utility Library Update 

 What's New Now 

 PCMag Announcements 

2. Select email format:

 HTML Text only 

3. Enter email address:

 Subscription Help | 
 -->

Renew | Give a Gift 

 Featured Offers 

 FREE WHITE PAPERS: 

The Benefits Of Switching From Antivirus To SaaS 

Small businesses realize that they are subject to the same regulations and exposed to the same risks as large organizations. And with more threats in circulation, their protection requirements are increasingly complex. Antivirus products require too much time and effort for most small and mid-sized companies. Learn the benefits of Software as a Service (SaaS) in this free white paper.

 Learn the benefits of Software as a Service (SaaS) in this free white paper.

 FREE RESOURCES: 

 • Microsoft Search Server Express Free Software 

 • Panda Managed Office Protection Free Trial 

 • ZoneAlarm Security Suite Free Trial 

 • VIPRE Antivirus + Antispyware Free Trial 

 NoteWhen 3: Clear the Clutter. Version 3 

 --->

 NoteWhen 3: Clear the Clutter. Version 3 adds many features that you, our subscribers, have been asking for. You can now: 

 • Send notes by e-mail, including Gmail or secure servers

 • Synchronize notes with notes from other machines

 • Lock notes to prevent further editing

 • Archive notes, taking them out of the list without deleting them

 • View scheduled events on a bigger calendar showing note titles

 • Make NoteWhen portable for flash drives

 • Export notes to HTML, RTF, Text, or CSV 

 • Print a list of notes

 Download Now: NoteWhen3Setup.zip 

 PCMag.com's live, online events make you more productive at work, home, and on the go. Best of all, they're FREE! 

 Featured Event: 

 Simple Solutions for Online Security 

 Thursday, June 18, 2009 at 11am PT / 2pm ETT
Sponsored by Trend Micro 

There are many reasons why website security is a hot topic these days. Every day we hear about an e-tailer whose customer information was stolen from its back-end databases by hackers, or about an online application that was compromised because it underwent less-stringent quality testing than conventional software. Register today .

 See all PCMagCasts >> 

 More Free PCMagCasts: 

 Corral Your Data with Smart File Servers 

 Tuesday, June 23, 2009 at 11am PT / 2pm ET - Sponsored by HP 

Many businesses host networked storage on file servers, but as data grows, so does the need for streamlined consolidation and organization. Failure to properly manage this data growth challenge can result in unused capacity, poor availability of files and data, and difficulty in finding shared files. 
 Register today .

 Learning Center: Fighting the Economic Downturn: How Technology Can Help You Save Money 

 Sponsored by Dell SB360 

Find the tools and best practices to cut cost and improve your business's productivity with technology. 
 Attend now .

 HP StorageWorks products-control, consolidation and confidence. 

Download Your Free Trial to Protect Your Entire Network in 20 Minutes with Panda Managed Office Protection

 The HP Officejet Pro. hp.com/go/colorforless

 Huge Savings! CyberLink PowerDirector 7 for Creating Great HD 
Movies 

 BlackBerry Professional Software-find out more

 Introducing the Nikon D5000 
A bold new perspective on still photography and HD movie creativity

 Security Threats: A Guide for SMBs. FREE Download. 

 Get the AT&T 3G LaptopConnect Card on the nation's FASTEST 3G* Network 

 FREE shipping and No Payments for 90 Days on all New Fujitsu LifeBook Notebooks and Tablet PCs. 

 Toughbook for a Toughworld™ In your world, only the tough survive. panasonic.com/toughbook

 Linksys by Cisco Media Hub - Click Now for FREE Shipping! 

 ScanSnap S1500 Color Double-sided Document Scanner

 Iomega NAS. Make it work for your small business.

 Mozy Online Backup - Unlimited Space - Only $4.95/Month!

Download your Free Trial of Panda Antivirus Pro 2009

 Dell Studio XPS 435 

 The Dell Studio XPS 435 does a great job with multimedia tasks like encoding video and editing photos, and does very well with 3D games.

 Dell Studio XPS 16 

 The Dell Studio XPS 16 delivers a lavish media center experience with a unique design, home-theater features, and a vibrant RGB LED widescreen.

Info Centers

 HP Printing Center 

 Lenovo ThinkPad & IdeaPad Notebook Store 

 Linksys by Cisco Networking Info Center 

Special Offers

Discover the benefits of moving from traditional antivirus to Security as a Service (SaaS) in this FREE white paper 

Simple, Automatic, Secure Online Backup with Mozy Online Backup 

Switching to Mac? Find answers to some of the most common PC-to-Mac questions 

Don't let low-functioning systems go unnoticed—Get Disk Performance Analyzer for Networks 2.0 free now! 

Free White Papers

 Panda Managed Office Protection for Small & Medium Business 

 Data Recovery for IBM AIX Environments 

 NetApp and VMware Virtual Infrastructure 3 Storage Best Practices 

 Solving 9 Common IT Challenges Through Workload Profiling and Portability 

 Midmarket ERP Solutions Comparison Guide 

 View all White Papers > 

 Click here to list your White Papers > 

 Canon PowerShot SD960 IS 

Canon PowerShot SD960 IS comes with a wide lens and a 16:9 LCD. But the images aren't as impressive as those from other Canon point-and-shooters.

• Full Review of Canon SD960 IS 

 Fujitsu M2010 

The M2010 is Fujitsu's first entry into the netbook market and brings with it a gorgeous screen.

• Full Review of Fujitsu M2010 

Recent Product Review Videos

  Plantronics Voyager Pro 

  Aliph Jawbone Prime 

Most Popular Videos

  Tech Tip: Speed Up Windows XP 

  Product Review: Apple iPhone 3G 

  Tech Tip: HDTV Must Have Accessories 

  DL.TV: Firefox Extensions 

  Feature: How To Overclock Your PC 

 All Videos > 

 PCMag After Hours: Apple! 

The gang discusses Apple's recent product announcements. Also, we interview Trent Reznor and the creator of the iFart app for iPhone.

 PCMag Radio Archives 

Most Popular Podcasts

  • The Future of Windows PCs 

  • Our Predictions For 2009 

  • Does Windows 7's Wow Start Now? 

  • iPhone vs. Blackberry Bold 

  • Windows Vista Headaches 

 All PCMag Radio Podcasts > 

RELATED ADS

 AntiVirus 

 Samsung LCD Monitor 

 AntiVirus Software Removal 

 PC Computer Monitor 

 Monitor Arm Review 

 Best Internet Security Software 

 5.6 Color TFT LCD Monitor 

 Issue Index | 
 Contact Us | 
 About | 
 Advertise | 
 Site Map | 
 Magazine Customer Service 

 Desktop PC Reviews  | 
 Cheap Laptops  | 
 Wireless Networking  | 
 Media Desktops  | 
 Laser Printers  | 
 InkJet Printers  | 
 MP3 Players  | 
 Digital Cameras  | 
 HDTV's  | 
 Computer & Console Video Gaming  | 
 Small Business Solutions  | 
 Everything Apple  | 
 LCD TVs & Monitors  | 
 Cheap Digital Cameras  | 
 Antivirus Software  | 
 Small Business Solutions 

 Ziff Davis Home  | 
 Contact Us  | 
 Advertise  | 
 Link to Us  | 
 Reprints  | 
 Magazine Subscriptions  | 
 Newsletters  |
 RSS Feeds  |
 Tech Shop  |
 Tech Encyclopedia  | 
 PC Downloads  | 
 Tech Jobs  | -->
 Tech Webcasts  |
 Tech Podcasts  |
 Tech Video  |
 White Papers  |
 Ziff Davis Media International 

 AppScout  |
 Cranky Geeks  | 
 DigitalLife  | 
 DL.TV  | 
 ExtremeTech  | 
 Filefront  | 
 GearLog  |
 GoodCleanTech  | 
 PCMag.com  | 
 PCMagCasts  | 
 Security Watch  | 
 Smart Device Central  | 
 What's New Now 

 AppScout Mobile  | 
 Gearlog Mobile  | 
 GoodCleanTech Mobile  | 
 PCMag.com Mobile 

Use of this site is governed by our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy 

Copyright © 
 1996-2009 Ziff Davis Publishing Holdings Inc. All Rights Reserved. PC Magazine is a registered trademark of Ziff Davis Publishing Holdings Inc. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of Ziff Davis Media Inc. is prohibited.