
===== servers-Itanium-vs-Sun-2002-6-2.txt =====
25B-600                     MAGAZINE
          ELECTROfftWOS
             San Jose, CA

             Cite- 47,102
                Weekly




          Bacon's




     Intel Comes Out
     Swinging at Sun
(^Benchmarks pit Itanium 2 chips
   against UltraSparc III servers'-^}
                               BY TOM MURPHY

   _Intel Corp, has taken another shot at Sun Microsystem’s domi­
   nance in servers with its new Itanium 2 chip, and this time it looks
   like it’s closer to a bulI’s-eyeQBut Intel has to be tested under bat­
   tlefield conditions and come up with much more firepower to com­
   pete with UltraSparc III servers above four-way platforms, one
    analyst said.
       Santa Clara, Calif.-based Intel released a series of benchmarks
    recently that demonstrate Itanium 2’s evolution in its McKinley ver­
    sion, which seems to demonstrate that it is far closer to what server
    builders are looking for in performance in a 64-bit processor than the
   chip’s current and disappointing Merced version.
       Performance improvements of 50 percent to 100 percent above the
   previous-generation chip are expected when the Itanium 2 McKin­
   ley makes its debut in Hewlett-Packard servers later this year, said
   Intel’s Jason Waxman of the enterprise platform marketing division.
       In enterprise resource planning applications, Intel’s 1GHz 1-2 chip
   is capable of twice the throughput of the original 800MHz Itanium,
   Intel said. In another benchmark comparison, Intel’s 1-2 was said to
   be twice as fast as a 1,050MHz UltraSparc III in floating point per­
   formance, according to SPECfp2000, published by the Standard Per­
   formance Evaluation Corp.
       “With the Itanium 2 performance improvements, it looks like Intel
   has put more pressure on Sun earlier than we had anticipated,” said
   Peter Kastner, executive VP of the Aberdeen Group in Boston.
       “If you really want to know how the Itanium 2-based boxes will
   perform, wait until they are announced by the OEMs,” Kastner
    added. “Clearly Intel wants to compare the Itanium with the best­
    in-breed of the RISC processors where Sun has the broadest mar­
    ket share.”
       Kastner said the benchmarking shown by Intel is impressive, as the
    Itanium 2 has trumped even Moore’s Law in some performance
    tests. But the benchmarks that really matter will be those tested on
    SAP, PeopleSoft and Oracle software applications, and potential buy­
    ers should wait until those numbers emerge before making a pur­
    chasing decision.
       A representative of Sun was quick to dispute the Intel claims, say­
    ing the tests don’t really provide apples-to-apples comparisons
   across platforms. “To make real comparisons, you need to test the
   chips on real workloads,” said Sue Kunz, director of marketing for
    Sun’s Processor Products Group. Such real workloads include per­
    formance on PeopleSoft and Lotus Notes applications, she said.
       “The power consumption numbers haven’t really gone down,”
    Kunz said. She even pointed to an HP box, which she said consisted
   predominantly of cooling equipment and fans.
       The 1-2 performance benchmarks are probably a little too close
   for comfort for Sun’s liking, Kastner said. Intel is showing impressive
   numbers in one-way to four-way boxes. But Sun’s UltraSparc chips
   can really strut their sluff in systems with up to 100 processors oper­
   ating simultaneously, Kastner said. ■                                 /
