SOURCE: SIPP_speech_Florida_06_30_03-13.ppt

--- Slide 1 ---
POLL #1
	How do you analyze and control your desktop/laptop  TCO? 

We have good desktop/laptop TCO reporting and strong strategies to control cost! 
We have good desktop / laptop TCO figures, but not much leeway in purchasing actions. 
We have an idea of our desktop/laptop  TCO, but we’re still reacting to the needs of sales, marketing, and operations. 
We don’t do much with TCO analysis.  We’re putting off purchases to control spending and cannibalizing/repairing to control operational costs.  
--- Slide 2 ---
PC Lifecycle Dynamics 
Peter Kastner                      
Executive Vice President and Chief Research Officer
AberdeenGroup
--- Slide 3 ---
Client-side Goals & Realities
Goals
Flexible acquisition choices & timing
Right size
User-driven choices
Low life-cycle costs
Acquisition
Support & Management
Decommission

Realities
Project-driven acquisition
User-driven configuration
High support costs
Config Variability
Constant changes
Innumerable platforms
[NOTES] There is a conflict in many organizations between what the Information Technology department wants to achieve and the reality that IT has to cope with.

Goals

Realities

As a result of the real world, we often see sub-optimized client acquisition, life-cycle costs, and decommissioning value.
--- Slide 4 ---
Best Practices Lower TCO
Best Practices
Active configuration & usage planning 
Policy-based software image management
Automated and active asset management
Active use of system management tools
Vendor involvement throughout lifecycle
  Downtime
  End User  Operations
  Admin
  Operations
  Hardware &  Software
Annual Cost per User
Basic
Practices
Best
Practices
$0
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
$4,000
$5,000
$6,000
$7,000
$8,000
$9,000
Legend:
--- Slide 5 ---
Aberdeen Best Practices Prioritized by ROI
Standard Images on Common Platforms
Automated Backup/Restore/Healing
Software Distribution
Device Synchronization
Remote Control
Thin Clients
Faster
ReturnonInvestment
Slower
ReturnonInvestment
--- Slide 6 ---
Specific Examples
Cost of managing PC infrastructure is what is important
--- Slide 7 ---
Stable Image Platforms: The Industry Problem



Components (product release, stepping, discontinuance,		drivers, OS version, middleware, apps)
OEM Stable Line (Goal, Reality)
IT Platform Quals (industry aggregate)
Lack of stable image platforms force IT to spend resources synchronizing components
[NOTES] The problem in delivering stable platforms is well known.  Component suppliers vying for design wins and consumer designs evolve products as fast as possible. Despite OEM efforts, some changes cause Images to stop working and the promise fails.  Most of all, IT managers want the best platforms that provide 12-months of availability starting from when they decide to qual a new platform – forcing unrealistic commits to win business.  
--- Slide 8 ---
Image Stability Platform ChallengeHW component changes/updates may require driver or BIOS updates – resulting in unplanned SW images and re-qualifications
C
Years
Qual A
Qual B
A
A.1
  A.2
B
B.1
B.2
C.1
HW component updatesmay require re-qualification against client installed base, thereby stopping deployment of PCs
Unexpected Platform Changes Add Maintenance and OS/App Deployment Complexity
Qual C
--- Slide 9 ---
Varying Success to Date 
Communications: 1:12 staff devoted to software image management and SMS
Financial Services: Post-merger, 400+ images on 16 hardware platforms with 5 OS’s, costing $$ millions
Beverages: Reduces image masters from 20 to 3 by standardizing hardware and better software delivery
--- Slide 10 ---
The Goal: Stable Image PlatformsQualify a new platform once each year and copy the golden image to all PCs purchased over the next 12 months without any re-qualifications from HW component changes
Years
Platform A
--- Slide 11 ---
Platform Best Practice
A platform is a basic combination of processor, chassis, motherboard, OS
Fewer platforms = Much better
Desktops:	3-4 a year (Performance, Mainstream 						      High & Low, Light Duty)
Notebook:	3-4 a year (Corridor, Mainstream, 						      Mobile, Executive)
Qualify centrally.  Order/deploy locally.  Reduce choices.
--- Slide 12 ---
Platform Seasonality Qualification Best Practices
Qualify all platforms during a 90-day period and then deploy for a year
Separate seasons for desktops and laptops
Use guidance of Intel® Stable Image Platform Program
Qualify all the permutations intended for use in next 12 mos.
Always qualify at highest processor speed level for maximum deployment life
Over life of deployment, configuration will migrate to lower-priced segments
--- Slide 13 ---
Software Qualification
Build an annual image(s) for hardware qualification season
Choose OS, service packs, utilities, middleware, desktop/mobile software
Freeze a version of enterprise custom apps
Qualify the image on permutations of PC & laptop platforms
Video, opticals,processors, motherboards, chassis, memory, etc.
Best Practice:  Fewest number of images to support
--- Slide 14 ---
Decommissioning
A 3-year old Pentium III business desktop is worth about $80 when sold in Q1 2003 for recycling
Reality is, in a few months, IT will have to pay $50 to have the PC properly disposed
Conclusion: last year of a PC’s life is more expensive than generally considered when decommissioning & failure costs are considered.  
Source: Aberdeen Group
[NOTES] The opportunity to sell an IT asset in the used equipment market evaporates when the value of the asset drops below the cost of disposal.  To avoid a hard cash expense, the asset must be sold at a cost that is at least equal to the disposal cost—but Aberdeen research indicates that this moment comes much faster than IT managers or common financial depreciation tables predict. 
Consider the street value of a typical corporate desktop that is three+ years old, a Pentium III 733 megahertz PC plotted over time.  Bought in March 2000, this desktop was worth $80 in recoverable street value in March 2003—a compounded depreciation rate of 8.6% a month.  The cost to properly recycle this PC is about $50 plus transportation because it is a looming liability to dump old PCs in a landfill. 
Most companies significantly overestimate the street value of their IT assets, and therefore miss the opportunity to sell the asset while it retains value – a rapidly closing window.  There is a glut of 3-to-4 year old machines hitting ending life which will rapidly drive down street prices into negative territory.


--- Slide 15 ---
Conclusions and Recommendations
PC Total Cost of Ownership is primarily operational costs
Efficiently deploy stable image platforms into your enterprise
Qualify new technology platforms in an annual  seasonal transition
Follow the guidance of the Intel® Stable Image Platform Program
Aberdeen Group recommends decommissioning PCs after 3 years for desktops or 2 years for notebooks to reduce operational costs 
--- Slide 16 ---
PC Lifecycle Dynamics 
Peter Kastner                      
Executive Vice President and Chief Research Officer
Aberdeen Group
--- Slide 17 ---
Case Study: Dr Pepper / AllStar
Aimee Oviatt, Strategic Alliance Strategist

--- Slide 18 ---
Players
Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Companies, Inc.
Maker of some of the world’s premier soft drink brands
Allstar Solutions, Inc.
IT solutions provider offering services including project management and  long-term outsourcing of internal IT functions. 

Dr Pepper Offices
--- Slide 19 ---
Environment (early 2001)
1500 machines / 800 users
150 users in St. Louis	
400 users in field locations
250 users at corporate
Desktops run Windows 95 on Pentium 233 machines with 24MB RAM
4 IT technicians 
Lotus Notes helpdesk database

--- Slide 20 ---
Challenges
Completely manual IT management of 1500 desktops (making 1 change or installing 1 new application required 1500 visits)
Anticipating a rollout of all new hardware and upgrade to Windows 2000 Professional
Ongoing printer management (drivers, change management, etc.) 
Excessive maintenance of IT tools (use of a floppy-based imaging tool; 20 images to update)

--- Slide 21 ---
Preliminary Solutions
Dr. Pepper evaluates tools to address challenges    -> selects Altiris Deployment Solution
Mitch Chadwick of Allstar becomes IT Manager
Hardware/software standards developed for rollout
IT staff begins internal training with Altiris Deployment Solution
--- Slide 22 ---
Challenge 1:  Helpdesk Inefficiencies
Solution: | Remote Control to quickly identify problem
Remotely deploy modifications/updates as Altiris RapidInstall Packages (RIPs)
Problem: | Too many open tickets; hard to identify problem from end user description; tickets not closing
Results: | Number of helpdesk tickets closed on the first call increases from 10% to 80%
Gartner Best Practices | Client Remote Control
Software Delivery 
--- Slide 23 ---
Challenge 2: New Hardware Deployment
Solution: | Defined events that grouped imaging, software delivery, configuration and personality migration tasks by department.
Problem: | 1500 machine rollout 
Results: | Reduced 4 to 6 hour config time per machine in a lab to 40 minutes at the user’s desk; took 1 technician 6 months part time
Gartner Best Practices | Disk Imaging
Software Delivery 
Personality Migration

--- Slide 24 ---
Challenge 3: Software Change Management
Solution: | Build a RIP for every change that affects more than 3 machines
Drag and drop RIPs to individual machines or machine groups
Problem: | Avoiding a visit to every desktop with each new application or system change 
Results: | Visits eliminated except for hardware failures; maintains standards; reduces problem resolution times 
Gartner Best Practices | Software Delivery 
Hardware/software standards

--- Slide 25 ---
Challenge 4: Printer Management 
Solution: | Webpage created with graphical listing of all printers/copiers on all floors; link to a RIP for each driver.   User finds printer to print to, clicks link, RIP installs drivers and maps to printer instantly with no reboot
Problem: | Users constantly need access to different printers but can’t install drivers or find network printers easily
Results: | Dramatic reduction in printer helpdesk calls and support time
Gartner Best Practices | Software Delivery 
Web-based user self help
Hardware/software standards

