===== On-the-Impact-of-Paul-Otellini-s-CEO-Years-at-Intel-Tech.pinions-Perspective-Insight-Analysis-3.txt =====
Home
About Tech.pinions
Contact Us
Sponsorship
RSS Feed
search...
 
Search
On the Impact of Paul Otellini’s CEO Years at Intel
Contributed Tech.pinions | Peter Kastner | April 28, 2013 3:16 pm | Edit
Intel’s CEO Paul Otellini is retiring in May 2013. His 40-year career at Intel now ending, it’s a timely
opportunity to look at his impact on Intel.
Intel As Otellini Took Over
In September 2004 when it was announced that Paul Otellini would take over as CEO, Intel was #46 on the
Fortune 100 list, and had ramped production to 1 million Pentium 4ʹ′s a week (today over a million processors a
day). The year ended with revenues of $34.2 billion. Otellini, who joined Intel with a new MBA in 1974, had 30
years of experience at Intel.
The immediate challenges the company faced fell into four areas: technology, growth, competition, and finance:
Technology: Intel processor architecture had pushed more transistors clocking faster, generating more heat. The
solution was to use the benefits of Moore’s Law to put more cores on each chip and run them at controllable —
and eventually much reduced — voltages.
Growth: The PC market was 80% desktops and 20% notebooks in 2004 with the North America and Europe
markets already mature. Intel had chip-making plants (aka fabs) coming online that were scaled to a continuing
20%-plus volume growth rate. Intel needed new markets.
Competition: AMD was ascendant, and a growing menace.  As Otellini was taking over, a market research firm
reported AMD had over 52% market share at U.S. retail, and Intel had fallen to #2. Clearly, Intel needed to win
with better products.
Finance: Revenue in 2004 recovered to beat 2000, the Internet bubble peak. Margins were in the low 50% range
— good but inadequate to fund both robust growth and high returns to shareholders.


---PAGE---

Where Intel Evolved Under Paul Otellini
Addressing these challenges, Otellini changed the Intel culture, setting higher expectations, and moving in many
new directions to take the company and the industry forward. Let’s look at major changes at Intel in the past
eight years in the four areas: technology, growth, competition, and finance:
Technology
Design for Manufacturing: Intel’s process technology in 2004 was at 90nm. To reliably achieve a new process
node and architecture every two years, Intel introduced the Tick-Tock model, where odd years deliver a new
architecture and even years deliver a new, smaller process node. The engineering and manufacturing fab teams
work together to design microprocessors that can be manufactured in high volume with few defects. Other key
accomplishments include High-K Metal Gate transistors at 45nm, 32nm products, 3D tri-gate transistors at 22nm,
and a 50% reduction in wafer production time.
Multi-core technology: The multi-core Intel PC was born in 2006 in the Core 2 Duo. Now, Intel uses Intel
Architecture (IA) as a technology lever for computing across small and tiny (Atom), average (Core and Xeon),
and massive (Phi) workloads. There is a deliberate continuum across computing needs, all supported by a
common IA and an industry of IA-compatible software tools and applications.
Performance per Watt: Otellini led Intel’s transformational technology initiative to deliver 10X more power-
efficient processors. Lower processor power requirements allow innovative form factors in tablets and notebooks
and are a home run in the data center. The power-efficiency initiative comes to maturity with the launch of the
fourth generation of Core processors, codename Haswell, later this quarter. Power efficiency is critical to growth
in mobile, discussed below.
Growth
When Otellini took over, the company focused on the chips it made, leaving the rest of the PC business to its
ecosystem partners. Recent unit growth in these mature markets comes from greater focus on a broader range of
customer’s computing needs, and in bringing leading technology to market rapidly and consistently. In so doing,
the company gained market share in all the PC and data center product categories.
The company shifted marketing emphasis from the mature North America and Europe to emerging geographies,
notably the BRIC countries — Brazil, Russia, India, and China. That formula accounted for a significant fraction
of revenue growth over the past five years.
Intel’s future growth requires developing new opportunities for microprocessors:
Mobile: The early Atom processors introduced in late 2008 were designed for low-cost netbooks and nettops, not
phones and tablets. Mobile was a market where the company had to reorganize, dig in, and catch up. The
energy-efficiency that benefits Haswell, the communications silicon from the 2010 Infineon acquisition, and the
forthcoming 14nm process in 2014 will finally allow the company to stand toe-to-toe with competitors
Qualcomm, nVidia, and Samsung using the Atom brand. Mobile is a huge growth opportunity.
Software: The company acquired Wind River Systems, a specialist in real-time software in 2009, and McAfee in
2010. These added to Intel’s own developer tools business. Software services business accelerates customer time
to market with new, Intel-based products. The company stepped up efforts in consumer device software,
optimizing the operating systems for Google (Android), Microsoft (Windows), and Samsung (Tizen). Why?
Consumer devices sell best when an integrated hardware/software/ecosystem like Apple’s iPhone exists.
Intelligent Systems: Specialized Atom systems on a chip (SoCs) with Wind River software and Infineon mobile
communications radios are increasingly being designed into medical devices, factory machines, automobiles, and
new product categories such as digital signage. While the global “embedded systems” market lacks the pizzazz


---PAGE---

of mobile, it is well north of $20 billion in size.
Competition
AMD today is a considerably reduced competitive threat, and Intel has gained back #1 market share in PCs,
notebooks, and data center.
Growth into the mobile markets is opening a new set of competitors which all use the ARM chip architecture.
Intel’s first hero products for mobile arrive later this year, and the battle will be on.
Financial
Intel has delivered solid, improved financial results to stakeholders under Otellini. With ever more efficient fabs,
the company has improved gross margins. Free cash flow supports a dividend above 4%, a $5B stock buyback
program, and a multi-year capital expense program targeted at building industry-leading fabs.
The changes in financial results are summarized in the table below, showing the year before Otellini took over as
CEO through the end of 2012.
GAAP
2004 2012 Change
Revenue
34.2B53.3B55.8%
Operating Income10.1B14.6B44.6%
Net Income
7.5B 11B 46.7%
EPS
$1.16 $2.13 83.6%
 
The Paul Otellini Legacy
There will be books written about Paul Otellini and his eight years at the helm of Intel. A leader should be
measured by the institution he or she leaves behind. I conclude those books will describe Intel in 2013 as
excelling in managed innovation, systematic growth, and shrewd risk-taking:
Managed Innovation: Intel and other tech companies always are innovative. But Intel manages innovation among
the best, on a repeatable schedule and with very high quality. That’s uncommon and exceedingly difficult to do
with consistency. For example, the Tick-Tock model is a business school case study: churning out ground-
breaking transistor technology, processors, and high-quality leading-edge manufacturing at a predictable, steady
pace of engineering to volume manufacturing. This repeatable process is Intel’s crown jewel, and is a national
asset.
Systematic Growth: Under Otellini, Intel made multi-billion dollar investments in each of the mobile, software,
and intelligent systems markets. Most of the payback growth will come in the future.
The company looks at the Total Addressable Market (TAM) for digital processors, decides what segments are
most profitable now and in the near future, and develops capacity and go-to-market plans to capture top-three
market share. TAM models are very common in the tech industry. But Intel is the only company constantly
looking at the entire global TAM for processors and related silicon. With an IA computing continuum of
products in place, plans to achieve more growth in all segments are realistic.
Shrewd Risk-Taking: The company is investing $35 billion in capital expenses for new chip-making plants and
equipment, creating manufacturing flexibility, foundry opportunities, and demonstrating a commitment to keep at
the forefront of chip-making technology. By winning the battle for cheaper and faster transistors, Intel ensures
itself a large share of a growing pie while keeping competitors playing catch-up.


---PAGE---

History and not analysts will grade the legacy of Paul Otellini as CEO at Intel. I am comfortable in predicting he
will be well regarded.
 
Follow me on Twitter @PeterSKastner
Source: New York Times
Tags: amd, intel, Mobile, notebooks, PC's, processors, semiconductors, servers, smartphones, SoCs, tablets
Email
Print
Peter Kastner
E-mail Peter Kastner
Follow peterskastner
Peter Kastner’s primary research focus is on workgroup, departmental, mobile, and enterprise personal
computing; and digital consumer products such as PCs. Kastner actively consults with enterprises on IT
strategies, and with suppliers on executive-level market research and positioning, industry analysis, strategic
planning development, product planning, and competitive strategies. He is an active private investor, and sits on
the board of NextIO and TheDailyGlobe.
Related Columns and Analysis:
1. Intel Could Use a Dose of Andy Grove
2. Apple’s iPhone and Intel’s Tick-Tock
3. All Eyes on Microsoft and Intel This Week
4. Intel vs. ARM – The Battle Is Just Beginning
5. The Case for Intel’s Future Smartphone Success


---PAGE---

Commenting Guidelines
We hope the conversations that take place on Tech.pinions will be respectful, energetic, constructive, intelligent,
and provocative. To make sure we all stay on-topic, all comments will be reviewed by our editors and may be
moderated. 
If you would like to comment we ask that you adhere to the following commenting guidelines. 
1. Our columnists are expressing their opinions. Please respect their opinion and the opinions of other
commenters. 2. No selling of products or services. We desire to keep this an ad-free zone. If you use the name of
a product or firm as your screenname, your comment may be considered spam and removed. 
3.No ad hominem attacks. These are conversations in which we debate ideas. Criticize ideas, not the people
behind them. Please be respectful. 
The Tech.pinions columnists
Leave a Comment
Logged in as Peter Kastner. Logout »
Add Reply
Most Reads
Most Commented
From:
Last 24 hours


---PAGE---

Last 7 days
Last 30 days
1. The Soft Improvements in new PCs Could be their Biggest Draw
2. Android’s Leaky Bucket
3. Why The Wheels Are Falling Off Microsoft
4. Ten Things I prefer to do on Microsoft Surface versus my Apple iPad
5. Apple In Perspective
6. Android v. iOS Part 3: Network Effect
7. The PC Industry of the Past Is Not the PC Industry of the Future
8. Android v. iOS Part 2: Profits
9. Amazon Plans on Stealing Android Developers From Google
10. The Windows 8 UI: Microsoft Makes a Tough Marketing Problem Worse
Featured Posts
The Soft Improvements in new PCs Could be their Biggest Draw
Patrick Moorhead in Featured Tech.pinions, Media, Personal Computers, The Daily Techpinion
The PC Industry of the Past Is Not the PC Industry of the Future
Ben Bajarin in Featured Tech.pinions
Touch Computing Is Touching Every Part Of Our Lives
John Kirk in Featured Tech.pinions
Cord-cutters Beware: It’s Going To Get Expensive
Steve Wildstrom in Featured Tech.pinions


---PAGE---

Facebook Home’s Uniquely Flawed Experience Examined
Patrick Moorhead in Featured Tech.pinions, Smart Phones
The Opinion Cast: The PC Slumps
by The Tech.pinions Team
on April 18th, 2013
The Apple Reality Distortion Field Podcast
by The Tech.pinions Team
on March 6th, 2013
Opinion Cast: Are Phablet’s For Real? Should Apple Make One?
by The Tech.pinions Team
on February 8th, 2013
The Opinion Cast Round Table: Blackberry Its Past and its Future
by The Tech.pinions Team


---PAGE---

on January 31st, 2013
About Tech.Pinions
Tech.pinions is an opinion platform for technology experts, analysts, thought leaders and luminaries. Our
goal is to bring you the best opinions from those closest to the industry. 
 
Tech.pinions is an Opinionated Media, Inc Publication.
 
Click here to Lean More about Tech.pinions
Archives
April 2013
March 2013
February 2013
January 2013
December 2012
November 2012
October 2012
September 2012
August 2012
July 2012
June 2012
May 2012
April 2012
March 2012
February 2012
January 2012
December 2011
November 2011
October 2011
September 2011
August 2011
July 2011
June 2011
Popular Posts
Sorry. No data so far.
Copyright © 2013 — Tech.pinions – Perspective, Insight, Analysis. All Rights Reserved. - Tech.pinions is a
Creative Strategies, Inc Partner Publication


---PAGE---

