SOURCE_URL: http://www.networkcomputing.com/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=18900418
MIME: text/html

Oracle And Dell Take Aim At Midsize Businesses - Server Center - Network Computing /SUPERNAV --> NEWS BLOGS FORUMS NEWSLETTERS RESEARCH EVENTS DIGITAL LIBRARY CAREERS --> IMMERSE YOURSELF: SOA | Data Center | 802.11n | Data Privacy | APO | Virtualization | NAC | Security | Network Mgmt | Enterprise Apps | Storage & Servers Home --> N E W S --> Subscribe to RSS DO: Print Article Discuss Feedback Reprint Download PDFs SEND TO: A Friend (Email) Del.icio.us Digg Slashdot Reddit Oracle And Dell Take Aim At Midsize Businesses After a couple of years working together to sell their combination of database software and commodity servers to large data centers, Dell and Oracle are turning their attention to small and midsize companies. --> --> Apr 7, 2004 - By Larry Greenemeier, InformationWeek --> After a couple of years working together to sell their combination of database software and commodity servers to large data centers, Dell and Oracle are turning their attention to small and midsize companies. Oracle has granted Dell the exclusive right, between now and year's end, to deliver preinstalled versions of Oracle Standard Edition One on Dell's PowerEdge 2600 or 2650 servers running either Red Hat Linux or Windows. These pre-install licensing agreements are available in five, 10, 25, and unlimited user variations, starting at $4,108. Dell's strategy is that many data centers will choose to proliferate relatively inexpensive Intel-based servers to meet growing IT demands rather than consolidate processors onto fewer, more-expensive servers. This scale-out strategy resonates with Oracle, which is looking to sell its database software into clustered and grid-computing environments. "We have no more important partner than Dell," Oracle CEO Larry Ellison said at a teleconference Tuesday with Dell chairman and CEO Michael Dell. The Latest Videos Watch demos of Intel's webpad-based Health Guide for seniors, at the New York City launch of Intel's $250-million alliance with GE. Michael Dell pointed out during the teleconference that his company has 30,000 customers running Oracle database software on Dell servers--double the number doing so a year ago. "We think this will help expand our business in the high-end server market and extend that into small and medium business customers, where we're seeing a lot of growth," he said. The company's close relationship with Oracle won't affect its relationship with Microsoft because Oracle's Standard Edition One "is not a direct competitor with Microsoft," Dell added. The pre-installation arrangement between Dell and Oracle will be particularly useful to small and midsize companies, Aberdeen Group analyst Peter Kastner says. Although it could take only 15 minutes for these companies to have the Oracle database installed at a later time, it could be an expensive 15 minutes if they have to hire a service provider to do it. While the exclusivity of Dell's arrangement with Oracle runs out at year's end, the nine-month head start for Dell could translate into 1 million shipments, Kastner says. "As the leader in the low-end server market, Dell will be able to take the exclusivity period to the bank." The companies also are expanding their existing sales agreement into China, in an effort to make it easier for Chinese companies to run Oracle's database, application server, and collaboration suite products on Linux-based Dell servers. Oracle is certifying PowerEdge servers with Red Flag DC 4.0 Linux and Oracle Database 10g at its China Development Center in Beijing. SEND TO: A Friend (Email) Del.icio.us Digg Slashdot Reddit Related Stories: • Dell Aims NAS Device at Workgroups, Small Businesses --> This site is not authorized to access the Community Everywhere feature. Sorry, your browser does not support iframes Overworked and under-appreciated? Open | Close Function: Information Technology Engineering Keyword(s): State: Post Your Resume Employers Area News & Features Blogs & Forums Career Resources Browse By: State | City SPONSOR RECENT JOB POSTINGS BTG - Now Hiring --> Featured Jobs: Boeing seeking Software Engineer 1 in Anaheim, CA Switch and Data seeking Site Facility Technician in Sunnyvale, CA New York Life seeking Insurance and Investment Sales in Schaumburg, IL Washington State Investment Board seeking IT Specialist in Olympia, WA Kforce seeking VA Mortgage Processors in Phoenix, AZ For more great jobs, career-related news, features and services, please visit our Career Center . CAREER NEWS Companies Looking To Hire CIO 2.0 After months of gloom and doom, companies are again hiring new CIOs. Minorities, Women Underrepresented In IT According to reports, minorities are underrepresented in high-technology companies. More articles from our career center Today's Most Popular Stories • Rolling Review: SOA Appliances • Making The Move To Multicore • Rolling Review: Web 2.0 Tools Demand A Cautious Approach • Rolling Review: Windows Server 2008 Server Core Today's News Analysis • Amazon EC2 Entices Innovative Uses With Persistent Storage • AIG Private Client Group Diagnoses SOA Glitches With BMC Solution • CA Emphasizes Holistic Enterprise IT Management • Apple Previews Its Next Mac OS 'Snow Leopard' REPORTS Analyize In-Line NAC strategies and products. ANALYTICS Plan and design your enterprise blade server deployments NetworkComputing Marketplace (Sponsored Links) ITT Technical Institute Get your degree today. Computer Networks, Information Technology and Security. Advertise With Us 2009 IT Salary Survey: Meager Raises, Solid Prospects ---> Though raises are notably smaller than a year ago, and job security’s shrinking, IT careers are looking safer than many others in this economic downturn. Get all the findings in InformationWeek's 2009 IT Salary Survey. Available FREE for a limited time . ROLLING RIGHT ALONG Follow key Network Computing Reviews from conception to completion. This Week: Holistic APM. Application Performance Management Best Practices Open Source BI: An Inexpensive Solution for Developers For Faster Analysis, Remember In-Memory Analytics Free Software Trial: WebSphere Business Modeler 6.0 Virtualization Trends to Watch VIEW ALL BRIEFING CENTERS --> --> Business Intelligence Integration • Network Security • Remote Access --> • IBM Security Health Scan • Transform Your Information into Competitive Advantage --> Microsite of the Week Powerful Information at Your Fingertips App Infrastructure | Messaging & Collaboration | Network & Systems Mgmt | Network Infrastructure | Security | Storage & Servers | Wireless | Enterprise Apps About Us | Contact Us | Site Map | Technology Marketing Solutions | Advertising Contacts | Briefing Centers Other Techweb Sites: InformationWeek Reports | Intelligent Enterprise | Light Reading | InformationWeek Techweb | Dark Reading | Network Computing Germany | Byte & Switch | bMighty | Small Biz Resource | InformationWeek Analytics --> Copyright © 2009 United Business Media LLC | Privacy Statement | Terms of Service