SOURCE_URL: http://www.prnewswire.com/cgi-bin/stories.pl?ACCT=104&STORY=/www/story/04-07-2003/0001921285&EDATE=
MIME: text/html

High Tech Monday Update Monday, April 7, 2003 Today's News --> --> High Tech Monday Update Monday, April 7, 2003 Last week, investors were faced with a more positive war tone and a deadly syndrome. Semiconductor issues took a hit after the Semiconductor Industry Association said worldwide sales fell 3.3% in February. Another industry that was signaled out was software. UBS Warburg cautioned that, "We believe that the environment for IT spending remains difficult given the continued economic weakness, and view it as further depressed by the ongoing geopolitical uncertainty." But the most interesting news affecting tech stocks related to the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). Market watchers worried about its impact on semiconductor and electronic manufacturers, especially when Motorola was ordered by Singapore officials to close its factory temporarily when an employee developed SARS-like symptoms. Intel and Hewlett-Packard also briefly shut their Hong Kong offices. Peter Kastner, an analyst at Aberdeen Group, told Dow Jones Newswires, "At a minimum, the SARS epidemic will cause schedule slippages and disrupt the aggressive growth plans that global electronics companies have for the affected geographies . . .Worst case, it could result in major supply chain disruptions and another downdraft for an already challenged industry." But it was not all bad news. Technology stocks really took off midweek on word that U.S.-led forces progressed closer to Baghdad. "We're generally optimistic about the impending march on Baghdad. That's what I would fully attribute (Wednesday's) rally to," said Peter Gottlieb, portfolio manager at First Albany Asset Management, to Reuters News. "I don't see anything beyond the war news that would give the market momentum." On the corporate front, Dell helped boost the computer industry after it reaffirmed its first-quarter profit. Going forward, investors will be looking for a containment of the SARS epidemic and more clarity on the war's conclusion. Barry Ritholtz, chief market strategist at Maxim Group, told Dow Jones Newswires, "Combine the technicals with better-than-expected news on the war front, and it's enough for a snapback rally." Hopefully the re-emergence of earnings season won't snap the rally. High-Tech Monday Update is provided courtesy of Thomson Financial. This information is believed to be true and accurate; we take no responsibility for inaccurate information and reserve the right to update our reports. For more information, please visit our web site at http://www.thomsonfinancial.com . SOURCE Thomson Financial Corporate Group Link to this page: back to top Related links: http://www.thomsonfinancial.com --> --> Issuers of news releases and not PR Newswire are solely responsible for the accuracy of the content. Terms and conditions, including restrictions on redistribution, apply. Copyright © 1996- 2009 PR Newswire Association LLC. All Rights Reserved. A United Business Media company.