Traveling With Centrino

Anyone traveling in the past couple of months would be hard pressed to have missed Intel’s $300 million ad campaign touting the unwired experience, which centers around the Centrino notebook and 802.11 WiFi services.  But Centrino notebooks are not yet a common sight on airplanes or in corporate conference rooms.  So let me share my experiences in traveling with a Centrino for a couple of months.
Centrino is Intel’s trademark for a new notebook architecture that consists of a Pentium M processor, a chipset, and a wireless radio.  Designed from the get-go to maximize effective performance while squeezing every watt out of batteries, the Centrino platform is becoming mainstream for business laptops.  The unwired ecosystem assumes a home, office, and on-the-go access to WiFi.  Today, that means 802.11b at 11 Mbps, with 802.11a this summer and 802.11g next year.
Screen
My traveling companion is a Gateway 450.  Like many early Centrino notebooks, the Gateway 450 is a corporate desktop replacement.  It has a huge 15” LCD screen, big enough for lots of open windows and a pleasure to relax to with a DVD during downtime.  At 1400 x 1050 pixels powered by an ATI Mobility graphics adapter, there is a lot of real estate and decent graphics power.  The screen backlight dims noticeably when on battery, but it’s more than adequate even in harsh sunlight.  A plus for screen landscape.
Portability
At 6.2 pounds, the Gateway 450 is more than I have lugged in some years.  I’m not afraid to admit to being a confirmed thin-and-light guy.  One who learned the hard way that excess travel weight makes for sore middle-age shoulders.  So four pounds is my preferred laptop weight.  That gets you 10-12” of screen, a smaller battery, and no second spindle for a CD-ROM or extra battery.  The Gateway 450 and its competitors are ideal for corridor cruisers who run from meeting to meeting where a couple of extra pounds are more nuisance than aggravation.  However, after three coast to coast trips with the 450, the weight hasn’t hurt as much as I thought it would.  True every-week road warriors will want to search out or wait for the thin-and-light models.  But the Gateway 450, with its versatile multibay, big screen, standard battery, and full-size keyboard may sway some votes, including mine.
Performance
Speed-wise, the Centrino-based Gateway 450 is a demon.  The 1.5GHz model I use has 512MB of DDR memory.  Notebook users moving up from an older, Pentium III notebook will be pleasantly surprised by the fast bootups and crisp response times.  Desktop users moving to a notebook will think they are working on a 2 GHz Pentium 4 or better.  This baby is plenty fast.  There is one speed bump higher than 1.5 GHz and two bumps lower in the current Pentium M family — processor power is unlikely to be a helpdesk complaint with Centrino users.
Battery Life
The Gateway 450 comes with a standard 14.8V, 4,200mAh battery.  An optional battery fits into the multibay slot instead of an optical drive.  Battery life compared to pre-Centrino days is outstanding.  The standard battery will play a DVD movie — a true battery-killing test — and have power for an hour or more of email pruning.  With the optional battery in the multibay, I find I no longer enter a conference room and head for the nearest power outlet.  I routinely go through a day alternating between wireless online and standby mode.  I have yet to end the business day with less than 40% battery capacity remaining.  I figure the Centrino would do a meritorious job while editing documents or email on a long-haul flight to Asia — and I’ll try that later this summer.
Wireless
The billion dollar question surrounding Centrino’s market success is making the unwired worker a universal reality.  The early results are encouraging.  Intel’s Centrino implementation of 802.11b WiFi in the Gateway 450 is superior to the PC cards I used to use, and to a Compaq TC 1000 with a built-in wireless solution that I recently tested.  The Centrino notebook has somewhat better range than older solutions.  I actually logged into a Cometa hot spot in a McDonalds from a fifteenth story hotel room across the street and up the block — a football field away at least.  The Centrino is also able to detect and connect with most hot spots and access points than earlier WiFi solutions.  Most of us simply need reliable and secure WiFi connections at a 1 Mbps Internet broadband speed.  Therefore, I rate distance at 1 Mbps higher than 11 Mbps at, say, 30 feet.  I can also report that wireless infrastructure is springing up rapidly around the country, especially in hotels and meeting places.  Another plus for Centrino.
Conclusions
Corporate PC planners are already set to buy three notebooks for every seven desktops this year in the U.S.  Based on my experience with the Gateway 450, the Intel Centrino platform is an excellent base for a long-term wireless notebook program. 
Thin-and-light has compromises too.  The desktop-replacement six pound Gateway 450 is more luggable (and the screen, loveable) than the mere specs would indicate. 
I expect new model introductions over the next few weeks that will expand the range of notebook models to include thin-and-light, tablet, and executive performance models of Centrino.  There’s no reason not to evaluate these products, since Centrino technology covers all the notebook form factors, and Intel is seriously committed to making it an excellent experience.
With Intel’s promise to keep new software images to minimum, Centrino-based notebooks will undoubtedly deliver better ROI at lower TCO than the replaced models.  That’s a good story indeed.  And prices are reasonable too compared to last year’s models.  
[Battery Life Remaining: 4:40]
Peter S. Kastner

May 28, 2003
