About Aberdeen Weekly PC Deals
Aberdeen Group's goal with the PC Deals Section is be a one-stop place to find the best deal on a name-brand PC. Each week, Aberdeen finds and presents online retailers' lowest offered prices on name brand PCs with Intel-architecture processors from Compaq, Dell, eMachines, Gateway, HP, and Sony. These six manufacturers make up over 60% of the U.S.'s PC market share and, therefore, their prices set the pace for the mass market. 

Reflecting the price points these PC manufacturers set, Aberdeen has chosen to target PCs in the price ranges of $550, $750, $900, $1,000, $1,100, $1,200, $1,350, $1,550, and $1,550+. As the price points are meant to break down and organize the vast number of PCs out there, they do not delineate the maximum possible price of a PC within a price point. Prices will range up to a price point's value. Because Aberdeen wants the Weekly Deals section to reflect what the average consumer purchases, it will not report PCs over about $1,700. 

Aberdeen has chosen to show multiple PCs in each category so that consumers can compare the winning deals with their competitors and/or view a great deal based on brand preference. To simplify comparisons, not all models from Compaq, Dell, eMachines, Gateway, HP, and Sony will be shown, but all models presented are the lowest price Aberdeen finds.

The first row, in bold, is the weekly winner under each price point. Since all machines in a price point have similar costs, processor speed, memory size and bandwidth, and hard drive speed and capacity are the major determining factors for what is the best deal. Aberdeen also considers DVD/CD optical drives and whether an offer includes a monitor. There may be two "best" deals under a price point, if Aberdeen considers both PCs winning offers for different audiences. For instance, a PC included in a 'bundle' with monitor and printer is a great deal for first-time PC buyers or students, but it would be incorrect to judge that bundled PC as better than a similarly priced, unbundled PC that has a faster processor and more memory geared toward the more advanced PC user. Also, PC prices do not always change from week to week; so, the best deal available may remain on the Weekly Deals Section for multiple weeks. For more information on how we select the weekly winners, click here.

All the deals shown can be purchased via the Web by clicking the link under the 'retailer' heading in a row that will open the retailer's website. In some noted cases the lowest prices may be in-store deals, in which case clicking the retailer's link will open its online store locator page. Aberdeen's listed prices factor in retailers' shipping charges and rebates, including mail-in rebates . 

Selecting the 'This Week's Analysis of PC Deals' link offers an explanation for what criteria make the winners the best deals at their price points. Current PC market trends and component prices are taken into consideration and discussed in this analysis of what sets the winners apart in the competitive PC retail marketplace.

Decide how much you are willing to spend and Aberdeen will show you the most machine you can get for your dollar. 

