URL: http://www.usatoday.com/money/industries/technology/maney/2004-09-21-maney_x.htm

USATODAY.com - Mac or PC? Windows' security issues help some users choose 

   Classifieds:   

  |  

  |  

  |  

 Home 

 News 

 Travel 

 Money 

 Sports 

 Life 

 Tech 

 Weather 

 More Money 

 My 
 USA TODAY 

 Money 
 columnists 

 Small 
 Business Connection 

 Markets 

 Markets 
 home 

 Most 
 active stocks 

 World 
 stocks 

 Commodities 

 Currencies 

 Key 
 interest rates 

 Internet 
 50 

 Investor Tools 

 Markets 
 Report 

 Your 
 Portfolio 

 Stock 
 screener 

 Fund 
 screener 

 Snap 
 quote 

 Economic 
 calendar 

 Company 
 calendar 

 Annual 
 reports 

 Managing Money 

 Your 
 Retirement 

 News/columns/tips 

 Calculators 

 CD 
 and loan rates 

 Special Sections 

 Cars 

 Jobs 

 Small 
 Business 

 Talk 
 Today 

 Today 
 in the Sky 

 Marketplace 

 Real 
 estate 

 Arcade 

 Shopping 

 Franchise 
 Center 

 Special 
 offers 

 International 
 business index 

 Business 

 opportunities 

 Newspaper 

 classifieds 

 Get a quote:  

 Your portfolio - Log in 

 Posted 9/21/2004 9:00 PM     Updated 9/22/2004 2:35 AM 

 Mac or PC? Windows' security issues help some users choose 
Get a Mac!

There. I hope all you Apple crazies are happy now and WILL STOP E-MAILING ME!

Sheesh.

Last week, I wrote about a virus giving a lobotomy to my Windows XP home computer. I got more e-mail about that column than any other, ever. The comments generally split into two camps:

• People who have Windows PCs and wanted to commiserate.

• Mac zealots who swarmed over my sad story like ants on a dropped Popsicle, all on a mission to "save" this allegedly misguided Microsoft captive. Now I know what it would feel like to wander into a Branch Davidian convention. Or to be a Democrat trapped in a room with Zell Miller.

Taken together, though, the two kinds of responses raise a point: This virus and security problem might be the biggest challenge to Microsoft in years. 

The message I get is that people are fed up with the vulnerability of Windows. They are increasingly willing to consider other options. And, for whatever reasons, Apple Computer's Macintosh and Linux-based computers hardly get infected or invaded at all.

My in-box is proof that hackers and virus writers know no bounds. They are filling Windows computers worldwide with pop-up ads and spyware, which can steal information from your hard drive. They're sending out viruses that outright destroy PCs, often taking out valuable digital files with it. 

It's not like you have to be stupid or negligent to have this happen. Jeff Hawkins — the guy who invented the Palm computer and wrote a just-out book about the brain — e-mailed to say that a virus killed his home PC. I got a similar note from Felix Sanchez, CEO of government services company TerraCom. "My brand-new Sony went kaput," he writes. "I hope our small office has not been further compromised."

The viruses have hit doctors and lawyers and all kinds of regular folks. Jacqueline Beckley, owner of small business The Understanding & Insight Group, says the viruses are costing her big bucks, and, "They should just hang each of the people who do the virus." 

Computer security is even a problem at St. Mary's Catholic School in Temple, Texas, writes Bernadette Hickman, whose title at the school is "Webmeister." As you might imagine, she stops short of calling for hangings. But the school has been switching to Macs.

Which brings us back to the Mac crowd.

There's a book coming out called The Cult of Mac . It is aptly titled. Loving a product is one thing, but these folks recruit non-believers like missionaries.

"There is a computing world where viruses and spyware are unheard of, and the promise of technology making life better is actually a realistic goal," e-mails Michael Bino of New Jersey, using evangelical language that would make Oral Roberts proud. "Try a Mac."

"I was in the same position until I saw the light," writes Wilson Gill of Australia. "I am a very, very happy Mac user. Take the plunge, and I guarantee you will never look back."

Am I missing something? Do the mushrooms come packaged right in the Mac box?

Cultishness aside, though, people are switching because of the security issue. In Austin, computer consultant Brad Hudelson was once a high-level manager at Dell, the leading maker of Windows PCs. Hudelson says he "gave up after Sasser (virus attacks) last year and replaced all my machines with Apples and Mac OS X."

Physician Thomas Essman switched for the same reason. So did Bryan Crawford, a biology professor at the University of Alberta in Canada. "I've been in computer heaven ever since," Crawford says.

Here's a particularly good one: Daryl Forrest is a developer of software for Windows. "I have moved all non-work-related computing to a new Apple Power Mac G5," he writes. "I like Windows XP, but the risks are too high these days. It's sad that it has gotten to this."

On and on it goes, one e-mail after another. 

And the threats are only going to get worse. Monday, security software maker Symantec reported it found 5,000 new viruses aimed at Windows in the first half of 2004 — a dramatic increase over 2003. 

Microsoft is not oblivious. "The environment has changed, clearly," says Gytis Barzdukas, an executive in Microsoft's security unit. "We are stepping up, trying to take more responsibility. We want to be partners with our customers in maintaining their PCs' health."

The company is frantically writing software patches to plug the Windows vulnerabilities. It is offering big-money bounties for the arrests of virus writers. It is trying to educate its users about computer safety — the equivalent, Barzdukas says, of telling car owners they should wear seat belts.

So far, Microsoft has had no luck staying ahead of the threats. The company plugs one hole or advises customers to take a certain measure, and the hackers find four ways around it. It's the software equivalent of trying to get rid of cockroaches.

Industry analysts don't think this is going to have a significant impact on buying decisions. Businesses, especially, are too heavily invested in Microsoft-based software. The costs to switch to the Mac "are huge and potentially career-threatening for most CIOs," says Peter Kastner, analyst at consulting firm Vericours. "No one has lost their job for keeping Windows."

Individuals, though, might be tempted for reasons that didn't exist a couple of years ago. This time, Microsoft hasn't done anything particularly wrong; the hackers are the bad guys. 

Blaming Microsoft for not building in safety measures is a little like blaming Florida for being in the path of a hurricane.

Still, Microsoft should be worried. It apparently has a lot of frustrated users out there.

 Kevin Maney has covered technology for USA TODAY since 1985. His column appears Wednesdays. Click here for an index of Technology columns. E-mail him at: kmaney@usatoday.com . 

Kevin Maney

9/22/2004 2:35 AM
 --> 

 Newspaper Home Delivery - Subscribe Today 

USATODAY.com partners: USA WEEKEND Sports Weekly Education Space.com 

 Home Travel News Money Sports Life Tech Weather 

 Resources: Mobile news 
 Site map 

 FAQ 

 Contact us 
 E-mail news 

 Jobs with us 
 Internships 
 Terms of service 
 Privacy policy/Your California Privacy Right 

 Advertise Press Room Media Lounge Electronic print edition Reprints and Permissions 

 Add USATODAY.com RSS feeds   

The Nation's Homepage

 Copyright 2008 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Co. Inc.