URL: http://www.planetanalog.com/showArticle.jhtml;jsessionid=PERIUSNMMCLVGQSNDLOSKH0CJUNN2JVN?articleID=12802517

Analysis: Asian virus casts shadow over supply chain

EE TIMES NETWORK

 Online Editions

 EE TIMES
 EE TIMES ASIA
 EE TIMES CHINA
 EE TIMES FRANCE
 EE TIMES GERMANY
 EE TIMES INDIA
 EE TIMES JAPAN
 EE TIMES KOREA
 EE TIMES TAIWAN
 EE TIMES UK
 EE TIMES EUROPE
 ANALOG EUROPE

 AUTOMOTIVE DL EUROPE
 POWER DL EUROPE

 Web Sites

 • Audio DesignLine
 • Automotive DesignLine
 • Career Center
 • CommsDesign
 • Microwave
    Engineering
 • Deepchip.com
 • Design & Reuse
 • Digital Home DesignLine
 • DSP DesignLine
 • EDA DesignLine
 • Embedded.com
 • Elektronik i Norden
 • Green SupplyLine
 • Industrial Control
    DesignLine
 • Planet Analog
 • Mobile Handset
    DesignLine

 • Power Management
    DesignLine
 • Programmable Logic
    DesignLine
 • RF DesignLine
 • The RF Edge
 • Techonline
 • Video | Imaging
    DesignLine
 • Wireless Net
    DesignLine

ELECTRONICS GROUP SITES

 • eeProductCenter
 • Electronics Supply &
    Manufacturing
 • Conferences
    and Events
 • Electronics Supply &
    Manufacturing--China
 • Electronics Express
 • Webinars

17 June 2009

Analysis: Asian virus casts shadow over supply chain
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) affects major semiconductor and electronic equipment makers 

By EBN

Planet Analog

April 16, 2003 (7:32 AM EST)

The following is excerpted from a report by Russ Craig and Peter Kastner of Aberdeen Group, Boston. 

The global electronics industry is built on the principles of high volumes and low costs. In recent years, getting the lowest semiconductor and electronics assembly costs has translated to manufacturing in the People's Republic of China. 

However, a recent outbreak of a contagious and fatal virus may break one of the oft over-looked rules of the electronics industry -- dependable supply. 

The Asia/Pacific region represents the dominant geographic source of both semiconductor production and consumption, with the People's Republic of China (PRC) being the current high-growth country. 

Asia/Pacific consumed 37% (or $52 billion) of 2002 semiconductor production. Semiconductor Industry Association forecasts for 2003 suggest those numbers will increase to 38% and $65 billion, respectively, with the PRC alone accounting for 11%. Asia/Pacific also represents the dominant source of laptops, desktops, and low-end networking equipment, with 85%-plus of all WiFi gear made in Taiwan and the PRC, as well as virtually all consumer electronics and toys. 

Manufacturing and R&D cost advantages have resulted in significant transfers of system manufacturing capacity from Korea, Taiwan, and Japan to the PRC -- Sony just announced that all PlayStation manufacturing is to be done in the PRC. In addition, eight new PRC 8-inch semiconductor plants are under construction, with production commitments to external firms such as NEC, Philips, Oki, Elipda, and Infineon. 

Unfortunately, SARS is getting in the way of this electronics mini-boom. The SARS outbreak, which is currently sweeping the world, originated in Guangdong Province in the PRC, adjacent to Hong Kong. 

Severe outbreaks are reported in the cities of Guangzhou and Shenzen, both major electronics manufacturing centers. As of the end of March, there were 792 reported cases in the province and 34 deaths. The PRC has not been forthcoming about the situation, and until recently claimed that the outbreak had been contained. Cases are now admitted in Beijing, Shanghai, and Shanxi -- all loci of electronic or semiconductor activity. 

SARS has also spread via Hong Kong to Singapore and Taiwan. So far, no cases have been reported in Japan or South Korea, the two other major electronics sources in the region. However, 77 Japanese tourists recently stayed in the Hong Kong hotel where SARS first appeared. Meanwhile, Hong Kong has quarantined over a 1,000 people and closed all schools, as has Singapore. In addition, Motorola has temporarily closed a cell phone manufacturing facility in Singapore after authorities quarantined 305 workers due to SARS exposure. 

Taiwan has 48 reported cases in five cities and counties. They have announced home quarantine for several hundred people, and are delivering food and drink to those affected. In addition, mass transport facilities are being disinfected. 

Many Taiwanese companies are discontinuing travel to Hong Kong and the PRC. Compal, a major manufacturer of laptops for Dell and HP, has barred employees from these countries until the epidemic has been controlled, as has Sunplus Technologies. Sony has indefinitely postponed a Taiwan procurement conference scheduled for April, citing the Iraq war rather than SARS. Craig Barrett, CEO of Intel, may skip the April 14 Intel Developers' Forum; and K.Y.Ho, CEO of ATI Technologies, has postponed a trip scheduled for April 1 to announce ATI's new line of graphics processors (a setback in their intense competitive battle with nVidia). 

Meanwhile, Asian air carriers are cutting flights due to plummeting tourism and business demand, as well as instituting strict screening and other precautions in an attempt to slow the spread of the disease. 

It is difficult to estimate the impact on regional electronics production and the aggressive disease expansion that is now underway. Travel between Taiwan and the PRC has historically been via Hong Kong for political reasons -- even without corporate bans, we suspect employees will be reluctant to go for obvious reasons. 

Companies such as Broadcom, Cirrus Logic, Conexant, and National Semiconductor maintain teams of applications engineers in the region. These engineers travel to customer sites to provide design support for use of their companies' semiconductors. Most manufacturing companies can't get new designs into the market or debug problems in current product without this support. At a minimum, schedules will slip. Should the epidemic takes hold near major electronics manufacturing sites, product sourced there would become in short supply. Local semiconductor manufacturers will suffer diminished capacity utilization, which could ripple into reductions in capital spending. In short, another mini down-cycle. 

Further, external manufacturers relying on Taiwanese or PRC components and semiconductors may find themselves in the same situation. In this case, the kingdom could be lost for lack of a nail -- or a capacitor. The PRC is the source of many electronic components and low-level assemblies. For example, AC-to-DC power supplies -- the little black cubes that clutter power strips -- are invariably made in the PRC. A laptop can be assembled anywhere, but it cannot be sold without a power supply. Thus, the dependable supply of key-component building blocks is threatened by SARS, not just the assembly plants in China. 

If China were hypothetically quarantined, it would take literally months of 24-7 work by manufacturing planners and logistics mavens to create qualified alternate production sources. That would mean nuclear winter to the semiconductor and electronics industry. 

More likely, now there is a disruption of airplane flights, which typically carry high-value or rush priority electronics goods. Ships, which carry the bulk of assembled electronics goods, will not be significantly delayed once they leave port because the SARS virus appears to have an incubation period of less than ten days -- cross the Pacific without symptoms and there are no public health problems. The question becomes how to get ships in and out of a quarantined port. 

It is difficult to gauge how pervasive the SARS epidemic will become in the Asia/Pacific region. The Hong Kong caseload is growing at about 100 per day. Inside the PRC, it is anyone's guess. At a minimum, the SARS epidemic will cause schedule slippages and disrupt the aggressive growth plans that global electronics companies have for the affected geographies. 

Worst case, it could result in major supply chain disruptions and another downdraft for an already challenged industry. Let's hope not. Our assumption is that the disease can and will be halted by aggressive public health actions going forward. If not, then the electronics industry will be a tiny part of humanity's problem. 

The deceit of the PRC government in hiding what has become a serious global health threat will not be quickly forgotten. The delicate balance between tight PRC government control and laissez faire capitalism in China is still at the "ironing out the kinks" stage and the government is often a major investor on PRC companies. 

New outside capital and equity investments in the PRC and Hong Kong are unlikely to close until the public health situation is stabilized, which will be measured in months. Even then, a new level of suspicion by investors of the government's ability to protect investments will take years to dispel. After all, low-cost manufacturing and disrupted supply are oil and water in a just-in-time world. 

Surely, Japanese and Korean firms will slow their rush to heretofore low-cost China. They were late to make the move and will benefit from this hiccup because they still have their current factories in place, in most cases. It is the Western technology companies that rushed into the PRC, and which now face disrupted supply chains. However, the entire electronics assembly industry has a critical, no-second-source dependence -- for the moment -- on components made in the PRC. 

 Please login or register here to post a comment or to get an email when other comments are made on this article

 TI's CC2530 SoC for ZigBee, RF4CE.
A true SoC for IEEE 802.15.4, ZigBee, ZigBee RF4CE and Smart Energy applications. Large flash memory of up to 256 KB makes the CC2530 is ideal for ZigBee PRO applications. The 64 K and up versions will support ZigBee RF4CE.
Click here to learn more.

Related Products

6U VME multi-processor board holds single- or dual-core processor

IDT debuts first multi-monitor support chip for DisplayPort

NXP claims data converters are first to support JEDEC JESD204A serial interface

Programmable clock generators have ultra-low phase jitter

USB power switches suit hot-swap applications

eeProductCenter

EE Times TechCareers

Search Jobs

Enter Keyword(s):

Function:

Engineering & Arch.
Information Tech.
State:

Post Your Resume-----------------Employers Area

Most Recent Posts

Boeing seeking Embedded Software Engineer 5 in Huntington Beach, CA 

Kforce seeking Clinical Research Specialist in North Wales, PA

Boeing seeking Real Time Software Engineer 5 in Anaheim, CA

Switch and Data seeking Site Facility Technician in Sunnyvale, CA

Osram Sylvania seeking LED R and D Engineer in Danvers, MA

More career-related news, resources and job postings for technology professionals

Sponsor Links

Wide VIN, Multioutput DC/DC Converter and PowerPath™ Controller
The LTC®3101 offers a compact power management solution for 
battery-powered and battery backup applications. It can deliver up 
to 800mA continuously for input voltages above 3V and is ideal for 
efficiently regulating a 3.0V or 3.3V output over the full 1.8V to 
5.5V input voltage range. Visit 
www.linear.com/LTC3101

Design Guidelines for High-Performance, Multichannel, Simultaneous-Sampling ADCs in Data-Acquisition Systems (DAS)
Specifically for designers of DAS applications, this technical paper by Maxim explains how to select and place components to achieve optimum performance.
 Read it here.

Conserve Battery Life in Portable Applications with Fairchild's FAN5361 Synchronous Buck Regulator.

All materials on this site Copyright © 2009 TechInsights, a Division of United Business Media LLC.All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions | Privacy Statement | Your California Privacy Rights