SOURCE_URL: http://www.processor.com/Editorial/article.asp?article=articles/p2550/22p50/22p50.asp&guid=
MIME: text/html

Processor Editorial Article - One Powerhouse Marriage Home | Register | Contact Us This Week's Issue Browse All Issues Search All Articles Product News & Information Company News & Information General Feature Articles News Opinions Cover Focus Articles Email This Print This General Information December 12, 2003 • Vol.25 Issue 50 Page(s) 6 in print issue One Powerhouse Marriage HP/Compaq Merger Carried Out With Near-Textbook Precision nt> When HP and Compaq Computer unveiled plans in 2000 to merge their two companies in a mammoth $18.5 billion transaction, much of the analyst community greeted the news with skepticism. Dissident director Walter Hewlett, who would lead a bruising proxy battle, was downright alarmed. Three years hence, the IT chattering class, if not Hewlett himself, has done an about-face. The favorable reappraisal is grounded in the enlarged entity's deft performance to date. The two organizations, say experts, intelligently and quickly integrated disparate assets and corporate cultures to produce a more competitive and nimble company. Result: a $73.1 billion titan that is moving aggressively to achieve a dominant position in nearly every sector of IT. "HP carried out on its [merger-related] goals faster than I expected," says Peter Kastner, a chief research officer with Aberdeen Group, a Boston-based market research firm. "The company made strategic decisions that turned out very well. They're now better than what the independent companies were before." Paul McGuckin, a vice president at Gartner, agrees. "Our view is that HP has executed extremely well integrating the two companies and finding cost savings." HP sliced $3 billion from its budget by eliminating overlapping people, processes, and products. The merged company cut either HP-branded or Compaq-branded solutions (generally Compaq's products on the high-end server side and HP units in the desktop and notebook spaces). And, by the end of the third quarter of 2003, the company had eliminated 16,800 jobs from a combined workforce of 150,000, 60,000 of which were Compaq employees. The cost cutting comes with caveats. HP's manufacturing and distribution costs, analysts point out, continue to lag behind industry leader Dell. And HP still spends heavily on R&D ($907 million for the fourth quarter ended Oct. 31), in part to maintain an expanded portfolio of OSes inherited from the merger. Says McGuckin, "I question whether HP can deliver on the promises to users of all their server operating systems. That's a lot of R&D to sustain to keep customers happy." Sterling Numbers Nonetheless, HP's belt-tightening is bearing fruit. During a Nov. 19 Web cast announcing its fourth-quarter results, HP reported an operating profit of $1.4 billion, up 63% from the year-ago period. Revenue totaled $19.9 billion, a gain of 10% from 2002. "Our results validate the execution of the [HP-Compaq] merger," says HP Chairman and CEO Carly Fiorina. "Our revenue in the fourth quarter was by far the strongest since we combined. We achieved profitability in each of our businesses, and we exceeded our integration and cost savings goals ahead of schedule." The upbeat Q4 report arrives on the heels of 2003 market studies showing the company attaining or maintaining a leading position in several key market spaces, helped in part by product lines inherited from Compaq. Pitfalls To Watch These rosy figures, however, mask an issue of concern to market-watchers: the dampening effect that declining prices are having on HP's revenue and profitability. The deflationary trend is mirrored in the wide difference between revenue and unit shipment gains in numerous categories. For example, industry-standard server revenue through shipments, which grew by 9% year-over-year for the quarter ended Oct. 31, rocketed 21%. "The rampant deflation in the server marketplace has everyone running around like crazy trying to lower costs," says Aberdeen's Kastner. HP's Fiorina acknowledges the pricing pressures but emphasizes up selling, as much as continuing cost reductions, as key remedies, particularly in the PC space. "Pricing is eroding [PC] margins, which declined 10% during the quarter," she says. "We expect to push higher-end desktops through up selling." Long-term, say experts, the HP-Compaq merger must be judged as much by HP's ability to create value and meet rising customer expectations as by the company's demonstrated capacity to find efficiencies. On that score, some say the jury is still out. "It's not complicated to take out costs or reduce staff," says Martin Wolf, president of Martin Wolf Associates, a mergers and acquisitions consulting firm. "It is complicated to put together two organizations with disparate cultures and grow the business. From my perspective, they've created no additional value. [The merger] has just been a giant exercise." James Mulick, president of merger and acquisitions firm Ameridan Resources, disagrees. "By taking out costs, they are creating value. When you can leverage one CFO across two organizations, that is true synergy. Some people poo-poo these synergies. But we've seen this model validated." Critics also note that the HP-Compaq merger, while enlarging HP's indirect channel of VARs, systems integrators, and other solutions providers, must get substantially bigger if the computer titan is to better compete in the SMB marketplace. HP's most serious threat on this front, notes Kastner, comes from IBM, which enjoys a more sizeable channel. HP is trying to close the gap. At midyear, the company kicked off its PartnerONE SMB Network. Now serving more than 2,000 partner branches, the program offers online sales assistance, quarterly business plans, market development funds, referrals, and other tools to help VARs grow revenue. In September, HP launched Smart Office, a $750 million initiative offering SMBs tailored support services, local expertise, and products to help manage their companies. McGuckin applauds these efforts but cautions that HP will face an uphill battle in the SMB arena so long as frictions continue between its direct and indirect sales channels. "The rules of engagement and ways of avoiding channel conflict have not been as clear at HP over the years as they've been, say, at Sun Microsystems," he says. "There's room for improvement." Hit The Ground Running Yet, observers agree that HP enters 2004 well-poised to build on its financial, marketing, and technological clout and boost market share as cut-throat competition forces continuing consolidation. HP's prime targets include high-end server customers and the huge market for custom-built "white boxes" or private-labeled computers. Says HP's Fiorina, "Since the merger, we've done a lot of hard work. You see the progress in our quarterly reports and very competitive portfolio." That portfolio marries best-of-breed solutions from the old HP and Compaq across a strikingly large number of assets: enterprise and personal systems; asset management; imaging and printing systems; plus financial, management, consulting, and integration services. Observers agree the new HP will be a force to reckon with for years to come. by Warren S. Hersch View the chart that accompanies this article. ( NOTE: These pages are PDF (Portable Document Format) files. You will need Adobe Acrobat to view these pages. Download Adobe Acrobat Reader ) Share This Article: Home Copyright & Legal Notice Privacy Policy Site Map Contact Us Search results delivered by the Troika ® system. Copyright © by Sandhills Publishing Company 2009. All rights reserved.