
September 17, 2001
Integrating HP and Compaq:  Success 
Must Stem from the PC Business
Though some critics may argue that the newly merged Hewlett-Packard/Compaq should divest the PC business as a millstone, the enterprise and consumer PC business
 is fundamental to the success of this acquisition.
Too Strategic to Divest
The PC business is going to be one big gorilla in the new HP’s garage.  The combined HP/Compaq will have one-third of its $87 billion in revenues in what HP calls “access devices,” which include desktop PCs, laptops and notebooks, and personal digital assistants (PDAs) such as iPaq and Jornada.  Such access devices represent $29 billion of today’s combined revenues.
Simply said, PC unit volumes help reduce costs on much more profitable servers through common components.  Dell is already a leader in Intel servers.  So the new HP must win on the PC front to retain consumer and enterprise bundling opportunities for its oh-so-profitable printers and other products and services.
In short, Aberdeen sees no viable long-term future in an HP/Compaq without a healthy PC business.  And we doubt HP management has thought at all about divesting the PC business; in fact, management expects to win with PCs and consumer Information Technology (IT).
What’s in the Numbers?
It’s old news that the PC manufacturing business has become horribly unprofitable for everybody but Dell Computer.  We estimate Compaq and HP lost over $300 million on PCs in calendar Q2 this year alone — the kind of red-ink bath that gets serious boardroom attention — even while losing market share.  While most observers focus on the relentless PC industry price war, insiders know the battle will be won or lost on cost containment.
Becoming #1 in a Global Market
On a worldwide basis, the new HP will have about 19% market share and the number one position, beating current number-one Dell by 5 to 6 market share points.  This share may not be apparent in the U.S., where Dell easily beats even the combined HP/Compaq.
Global high-tech watchers point to Compaq’s strong presence in Japan, and HP’s almost 40% annual growth rate in Europe — when worldwide PC sales are declining.  In the global market battle for
PC domination, both Compaq and HP have discernable market strengths.
A Complete PC Product Line 
Though a lot of faceplate plastic has to be thrown out whole to integrate the two companies’ products, the fact is that Compaq and HP have a complete product line.  That allows the new HP to attack both mass and niche markets globally — the only PC company with such an ability.
In the enterprise PC market, HP will have a soup-to-nuts desktop and laptop line, including all the form factors and manageability levels at all of the price/performance points.  HP will have to keep Compaq’s channel business alive while more aggressively going after bids at non-HP customer sites — with a formula for winning against Dell’s Internet and telephone sales machine.
We look for the most change to come on the consumer side of the business.  First, that is where Dell is now mercilessly picking up significant market share, a real sore point to the retail kings, Compaq and HP.  Second, CEO Carly Fiorina has a clearly stated strategy of HP quickly becoming the world’s number-one consumer IT company.
Watch the Consumer IT Space
HP’s consumer IT strategy bears watching for a number of reasons.  First, Compaq with iPaq and HP with Jornada are the major players in Pocket PCs — the fastest growing PDA segment.  Aberdeen research suggests that Windows PDAs will go mainstream next year, replacing Palm-based devices as the next generation for many enterprise and personal users.  A $550 iPaq PDA costs less to make than a $550 low-end PC, so it’s a more profitable sale.
Second, HP and Compaq have parallel but complementary strategies to populate the digital home with consumer products — Internet radio on the stereo, home networking, writable DVD disks, digital imaging, photography, as well as those profitable printers with the ink annuity.
Leadership in PC and Consumer IT
With only point-product competition from Japan’s Sony, Canon, and Epson, an integrated PC product line from the new HP that includes the industry’s most innovative consumer IT product line could well succeed in the retail channel.  The HP and Compaq brands have clout.  No other IT supplier is going after the digital home with the HP/Compaq vision and focus.
Aberdeen Conclusions
The new HP will have to deliberately jettison a lot of culture along the way to profits in the PC side of the business.
Our findings indicate that HP management is low-balling Wall Street on the merger savings that could be attained.  A ruthless cost-reducing integration plan — which we believe is already underway — could cut billions more from cost of goods sold.  Add an emerging consumer IT opportunity, and the deal could come up roses.
Peter Kastner
