ADLS Chase Manhattan bank
Background
Arthur D little was a consultant to chase Manhattan bank at the highest David Rockefeller levels. It came to our attention that chase had a significant problem in its trust operations department. Around 1972, chase began to replace its existing card oriented trust and securities handling system. The reason was simple the card handling was done by Univac 96-column cards, and Univac was getting out of the unit record business. 
Chase management made two prudent decisions: they bought a large volume of spare parts for their obsolescent Univac card machines, and they started a large IT project to bring trust processing onto their IBM 360/ mainframe. 
Fast forward a year. One long weekend, the janitorial staff made the decision to empty the locked closet containing the world's supply of univac unit record spare parts. Chase tracked those parts all the way out to the ocean where they were dumped at sea. At this point, an audit of the parallel IT project was called and Arthur D little was brought in. The IT project was a complete disaster there were 400 written COBOL programs. However, there was no system flow chart. ADL quick concluded the chief team would not complete the new trust operations system before the bank ran out of punch card machines. (I wish I was at that meeting.) 
One of the team numbers, Murray Sherry, who had been my boss at Phi, and had hired me into ADL, came up with the idea of using Cosmos to rapidly substitute for the floundering Chase effort.
Transition to TOOS—Trust Operating Operating System
I was one of the few people in the world who was fluent in Cosmos. However, I was deeply engaged as project leader in the Ocean Spray Cranberries project. With nowhere else to turn for substitution, I was yanked from the Ocean Spray project and put on an airplane to New York City. We were able to hire as a contractor Mary Ellen Holland as co developer of the Cosmos-based applications. Mary Ellen, known as Mel, had worked at marine Midland bank with cosmos and notably was the first woman to graduate from Columbia University with an MBA. She was one of those early brilliant technology women that you read about.
The TOOS Applications
Mel and I collaborated on everything. The application design was fairly straightforward. I was the lead on the securities application and Mel had the customer application. In a batch processing environment, the day’s transactions were validated in cosmos and sorted down into application and then processed in each application. Thus, price changes, stock splits, and dividends were processed before being needed in the customer applications for pricing and statements. After the updates, report records were reported and printed or sent as files to other applications.
Both the securities and customer applications were about the same size, 6000 punch cards. Each application resulted in a 12 million line Cobol application. The 6000 lines of code were well within my span of control it took roughly six months to design and program each application, which of course was done in parallel. Meanwhile, a Chase team was working on the conversion of the unit-record application and system testing.
Your eyebrows may have raised reading the last paragraph about that 12 million line Cobol application. Yes the Cobol framework was large but most of that code was for exception handling that the Cosmos programmer did not have to worry about. In reality, a 256K IBM 360/65 mainframe running the MVS operating system could process thousands of accounts per minute. 
Phasing Out
With all of the unit testing completed, ADL was able to meet a client's requirement that I participate as proposed in designing and implementing a hospital administration system in Rio de Janeiro. That yanked me off the Chase Manhattan Bank project before it went into production however I kept in touch and it did indeed go into production and to the best of my knowledge the cosmos code I wrote never caused an application rerun. That I am proud of.
Anecdotes
One of the project challenges was having to fit the data that formally fit on 96 column evac punch cards onto IBM 80 column cards. Choices were made and 1 turned out to be incorrect. Turns out David Rockefeller, chairman of the bank, required more than $99,999,999.99  for his quarterly Exxon dividends. I cheekily asked how big does it need to be. The answer was one more 9.
Mill Holland, who lived in the far reaches of Connecticut, often stayed with her sister in swanky midtown New York I had to be very careful not to drool while walking past the Renoirs in the sister's apartment, which looked like a Sotheby’s preview.
I was a bachelor in New York on expense account. I stayed at the Drake hotel and often ate at the quaint restaurants on what is now called billionaire row. Life was good.
There were times when I could leave the chase building and catch a 435 helicopter from South ferry and the airborne to Boston by 5:15. Those days are gone.
A few thoughts on ocean spray cranberries
1 the Burroughs 1700 was the small machine. the flaw at ocean spray was twofold 
A 1st the B 1700 only had 64 K of semiconductor memory however it had a virtual operating system. The configuration was specified by Burroughs and obviously the memory was inadequate,
B unfortunately, the virtual operating system with inadequate main memory did what it was designed to do: it paged to external storage, Which was very slow drum storage. It took 20 minutes to compile a simple program.

2 The Burroughs smart terminals place at each of the four major cranberry processing centers were the state-of-the-art idea in 1972 they were keyboard based, could print complicated order forms with multiple copies, were programmable, and had cassette storage so work could be done offline without tying up a phone line to run the 300 bps modem  (long distance phone calls cost more than $1 a minute). The programming was done by a Burroughs recommended subcontractor. I was at chase Manhattan when all of the pieces of ocean spray cranberries were put together.


