The sheets of S-2 Glass are toi'ineu"
__ //?/«<? w$:r
Honeywell Bull
To Trim 15%
Of U.S. Staff
By Christopher J. Chipello
Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal
BILLERICA, Mass. - Honeywell Bull
Inc., struggling to assert itself as a force
in the computer market, said it will reduce
its U.S. work force by 15% in an effort to
bolster productivity.
Roland Pampel, chief executive officer,
said most of the 1,600 employees affected
will be in manufacturing and administra­
tion and that ‘‘we aren't touching" the
sales force. He said research and develop­
ment spending will be trimmed.
Mr. Pampel also said Honeywell Bull
expects to report that 1988 revenue rose 7%
or more from the $2.06 billion posted for
1987, the company’s first year as a sepa­
rate venture. Profit for 1987 was $17.4 mil­
lion. Mr. Pampel didn’t estimate 1988
profit. He said he expects “similar
growth” in revenue in 1989.
Honeywell Bull includes the former
computer operations of Honeywell Inc.,
and is 65%-controlled by Groupe Bull of
France. Honeywell Inc. and Japan’s NEC
Corp, own the rest.
Honeywell Bull “had to bite the bullet,”
said Peter Kastner of Aberdeen Group, a
Boston-based consulting firm specializing
in the computer market. The computer in­
dustry now “is much like the railroad busi­
ness was 30 years ago,” he said. "You ei­
ther consolidate and clearly execute your
strategies, or there's a good chance that
you’ll disappear. Right now, it’s unclear
that Honeywell [Bull] will be a long-term
player.”
Mr. Kastner said he believes Mr. Pam­
pel, who was president of Apollo Computer
Co. before joining Honeywell Bull in July,
was brought in "to clean up."
As part of the effort to streamline Hon­
eywell Bull’s U.S. operations, research and
development spending will be trimmed to
about 10.5% of revenue, from the current
11.3%. Mr. Pampel said the reduction
brings the proportion more into line with
that at other major computer companies.
"We will accelerate our movement to- [
ward industry standards and open systems
that our customers are demanding,” Mr. I
Pampel said. The company is "aiming to
have a single product line,” integrated
with that of Groupe Bull, which recently
raised its stake in the joint venture from ‘
42.5%. “We are striving to be a $5 billion-
to-$6 billion force” with Bull, he said.
Honeywell Bull last week announced
early-retirement incentives for about 900
employees, most of them in the Boston
area. After voluntary retirees have been
identified in February, the rest of the re­
ductions will take place through layoffs,
the company said.
After the U.S. staff reductions, Hon­
eywell Bull will have about 18,100 em­
ployees world-wide, including 8,900 in the
U.S. “We felt the U.S. needed the most im- i
provements in productivity and costs,"
said Mr. Pampel, noting that overseas fa­
cilities are much smaller.

