DocuCorp Project Plan
Preliminary Activities
DocuCorp will assign a primary contact to serve as the DocuCorp-side project manager for the duration of the engagement. This person should be senior enough to have visibility and influence across a broad spectrum of the company's constituency. The liaison will participate as a member of both the Aberdeen and the DocuCorp teams. Similarly, Aberdeen will designate a project manager at the managing Director level. A telephone kickoff between the designated parties to arrange logistics and processes will inaugurate the engagement. (1 analyst day - Senior Executive and Managing Director)

Phase 1 - Discovery
Aberdeen Team at Dallas - June 2000
A Managing Director and a Research Director/Senior Analyst spend two days in Dallas meeting one-on-one with key DocuCorp managers representing sales, R&D projects, support, and professional services. These preliminary meetings will provide background information at a level of operational granularity unavailable from senior management discussions. Additionally, Aberdeen's experience demonstrates that involving all major functional areas early in the process increases the likelihood of success in any change initiative. (4 Director level days)

DocuCorp's executive and senior management team meet with the Aberdeen team for a day and a half in Dallas. Day one is DocuCorp's presentation of its products, organization, goals, obstacles, opportunities, and processes. It is Aberdeen's intention to receive a thorough, high-level understanding of the DocuCorp landscape as a point of departure. Upon breaking for the day, the Aberdeen team, including the DocuCorp project manager will meet into the evening to formulate Aberdeen's presentation of rough cut findings. Those findings will be delivered by Aberdeen to the DocuCorp executive team on the morning of the second day. The findings will indicate Aberdeen's initial assessment of DocuCorp's market position, opportunities, and challenges as well as rough cut recommendations for moving forward. DocuCorp's team will be asked to respond to the presentation, making it possible for Aberdeen to leave Dallas with a set of working premises and targets. (8 analyst days; 1 Senior Executive, 2 Managing Directors, 1 Senior Analyst)

Deliverable: Aberdeen delivers meeting notes that capture the findings, reasoning process, and any conclusions reached. (1 analyst day; Managing Director)

Phase 2 - Research
Aberdeen Task Force in Boston - June/July 2000
Aberdeen analysts representing a broad spectrum of spaces and disciplines will be assembled into a task force to brainstorm the DocuCorp proposition. The group seeks to develop a full range of possibilities for the company and then to narrow that universe to the most promising of approaches. Analysts will branch out to perform drill-down analysis of competition, opportunities, and challenges inherent to strategies involving their specific spaces.

Regrouping, the task force will work together to develop the most compelling strategies for DocuCorp. Disciplines represented on the task force will include: e-Business, Internet infrastructure, platforms, enterprise management, storage, database, information security, enterprise applications, supply chain, customer relationship management, data knowledge, professional services, ASPs, telecommunications, emerging technologies, as well as vertical industry expertise. (25 analyst days, Managing and Research Directors, Senior Analysts)

Deliverables: A Powerpoint presentation with notes detailing Aberdeen's recommendations for DocuCorp strategy.

Phase 3 - The Reasoning
Aberdeen and DocuCorp Project Team in Dallas - July 2000
Aberdeen presents a detailed set of high-level recommendations for strategy, positioning, product requirements, competition, opportunity challenges, potential partnering solutions, and critical success factors.

Aberdeen and DocuCorp will work together to bulletproof the strategy as well as to refine it into a rough-cut go-to-market plan across all functional areas. This meeting will be planned for one and a half days. (4 analyst days; 1 Senior Executive, 2 Managing/Research Directors, 1 senior Analyst)

Deliverables: July/August 2000
- Go-to-market implementation plan
- Presentation for the Board
- Vehicle for conveying strategy to sales force
(8 analyst days; Managing Directors)

Phase 4 - The Presentations
Aberdeen presents to the Board in Colorado - August 2000 (2 analyst days; Senior Executive and Managing Director)
Aberdeen presents to sales force - August 2000 (1 analyst day; Managing Director)
