
===== NCR-Norway-OLTP-RDBMS-1992-7.txt =====
Challenges and opportunities with transaction processing in an open environment. 

A mini-seminar hosted by NCR Corporation
NCR
An AT&T Company 

AGENDA
09.15 09.25
Introduction v/SteinarHøistad, Adm. director, NCR NorgeAS
What a manager needs to know about transaction processing in an open environment
Traditional On Line Transaction Processing (OLTP) technology was characterized by a central computer - often a mainframe, unintelligent terminals, and a proprietary transaction processing software development and runtime environment. Open OLTP is a computer mechanism that changes the state of ±e enterprise in real-time while using industry standards which support interoperability across a mixture of computing systems. Aberdeen Group believes that Open OLTP is now a mature enough technology that it should be seriously considered by enterprise management. The business issues that support this conclusion include the advantages of downsizing, lower cost of ownership, and distributed computing.
The presentation examines why OLTP is a powerful technology tool for business. The migration from traditional OLTP to OPEN OLTP, and the benefits it can provide. What buyers should look for in evaluating suppliers and products is also discussed.
Lecturer: Peter S. Kastner, Vice President, Aberdeen Group, Inc. Pause
Synergy effects between transaction processing and relational databases in an open environment
The advent of multiple-vendor, multiple-machine, multiple-operating system environment opened the floodgate of choice for users of computer systems. Users were free to develop their applications on hardware provided by one vendor, while keeping their options to switch to hardware provided by another vendor. Availability of such technology caused a shift to Client/Server computing with multiple server hardware and operating system platforms. This approach, while permitting downsizing, introduced problems in the areas of administration, maintenance, and redundant data.
Oracle Corporation believes that doing business in the 1990s requires a re-examination of this philosophy. The trend will be towards Open OLTP systems as the backbone of critical business functions. This will require large massively parallel open hardware as well as an industry compliant, open relation database management system. In order to bring critical enterprise data on-line, the hardware end RDMS must provide high system availability, cost effectiveness, data integrity, performance scalability, and interoperability with other systems.
The presentation describes how an organization can take advantage of Open OLTP and Open relation database technologies to enhance their competitive position through the 1990's and into the next century.
Lecturer: Sven Aamodt, Technical Director, Oracle Norge AS
10.25 10.30
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992 

11.30 11.35
Pause
The future success factor of transaction processing under UNIX System V
In the 1990s, business leaders are facing unprecedented challenges faced with shortened product and service life cycles and intensified global competition, toda/s managers must have instant access to information in order to successfully compete. It is no longer possible, or affordable, to re-invent information processing tools as user needs grow or expand. The definition and adoption of IT architectural standards is mandatory to release the goals of minimizing training and retraining concentrating on evolving business applications to provide real-world competitive advantages and maximizing information compatibility with other intemal and extemal organization through interoperable IT systems. Under the umbrella of the UNIX International AT LAS architecture the Corporate Hub Environment defines the computing environment that provides business critical commercial processing capabilities centered on transaction processing under UNIX System V. Characteristically this environment will include large data bases, high availability, fast and predictable response times, a large user base and a reflection of business priorities.
The presentation describes the scope of these characteristics, the technology enablers, and the products available now which provide the benefits of open, and interoperable systems.
Lecturer: ScottHansen, Managing Director, UnixInternational. Conclusion v/Steinar Høistad
Lunch
12.35 p.m. 12.50 p.m.
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992 

BIOGRAPHIES OF LECTURERS
Peter S. Kastner, Aberdeen Group
Peter S. Kastner is vice president with responsibility for "Commercial Systems Practice" at Aberdeen Group. He is one of the industry's leading analysts in the areas of OLTP, client/server architectures, application testing and analysis. Kastner has led several studies on operating systems, software and database systems.
1 In 1990 he authored Aberdeen's reports; “Transaction Processing into the 1990s” and “The Hardware Suppliers”, and in
1991 the report “Evaluating Options in Microprocessor Multiprocessing”. He frequently lectures on current in industry conferences. He has lectured for Apple Computer, ASK Ingres Corporation, DEC, Hewlett-Packard, NCR and Stratus Computer.
Previously, Kastner was head of marketing and sales for DEC, Prime and Stratus Computer. For a period, he was a consultant for Arthur D. Little Inc.
Peter S. Kastner has been involved in several systems development projects, with mainframes, minicomputers and workstations, in the retail, banking and finance, healthcare and public sectors.
Scott Hansen is “Managing Director” in Unix International’s European division. He was previously employed in AT&T’s EDB section in the USA. During his last time at AT&T, he was “Application Development System Director” with responsibility for the development and maintenance of UNIX for distributed environments.
In addition, he was responsible for AT&T’s software products. In this connection, he was instrumental in the decision to choose UNIX as the operating system for AT&T’s network solutions.
Scott Hansen holds Bachelor of Science degrees in computer science, business management, and statistics from Kansas State University. He also holds a Master of Science in Industrial Engineering. Hansen served on the X/Open board of directors on behalf of AT&T.
Scott Hansen, Unix International
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992

QUOTES FROM CONSULTANTS AND THE DATA PRESS
Dataquest/Ledgeway
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
"...The May 1991 merger with AT&T strengthened NCR's position as an leader in open systems and cooperative computingaerossstandards. NCRabsorbed AT&T's ComputerSystemsDivision, folding AT&T'ssubstantial communications and networking expertise and Services into its offerings. ...”
'NCR has positioned itself in a high-growth area: open, integrated systems based on industry standards. Its vision of developing a world-class service portfolio reflects this position.
"Now you can get the best open OLTP environment on a wide variety of systems. This (agreement with Independence Technologies Inc., to port NCR TopEND to multiple systems) is a milestone in the advancement towardopen OLTP. ..."
"The pieces of the puzzle are rapidly falling into place. People can now consider mission-critical OLTP on the price/performance curve of open systems."
"...NCR (the combined operations ofNCR andAT&T Data Systems) is investing heavily in multiprocessor designs for enterprise systems, workgroup software, and hardware and software extensions for pen and multimedia support. So its reps can also walk into customeds Office and say with credibility that NCR's produets can solve real business problems."
INFOWORLD
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992 

PARTICIPANTS
Aaraas, Halvor
Aasen, Olav
Bragstad, Thor Einertsen, Terje Glendrange, Jan Petter Grongstad, Johanne Grødem, Knut
Guneriussen, Trond Haakonsen, Per Hansen, Svein Hauknes, Øivind Hesjedal, Oddvar Hiltveit, Øivind
Johnsrud, Tom Fr. Kalleberg, Tor Larsen, Jan Sigurd Larsen, Terje
Lovett, Hilde M Lundby, Roar
Nilsen, Trygve Nøkling, Lars
Olsen, Tom Evert Riise, Bjørn Rosenkilde, Per Holte Thorvaldsen, Thorvald Underland, Ragnar
Valstad, Per Bjarne Vattekar, Odd Wikene, Erik
Den norske Bank AS Oslo
Novit AS Trondheim
Fokus Bank AS Trondheim
Teamco AS Oslo
Fellesdata AS Oslo
Computer Shop Oslo
Touche Ross Management Consultans
Oslo
Statskonsult Oslo Forlaggsentralen ANS Oslo Norbås Prosjektet Oslo
AS Union Skien
ISI Oslo Fellesdata AS Oslo Fellesdata AS Oslo Sandefjordbanken (NBF) Sandefjord Fellesdata AS Oslo
Den norske Bank AS Bergen Norsk Regnesentral Oslo Bull AS Oslo AS Union Skien Novit AS Bergen Bull AS Oslo Sparebankenes brukerforening Klæbu
Gjettum Landbruksdata AS Oslo
Luftforsvaretets Forsyningskommando Kjeller Novit AS Trondheim Landbruksdata AS Oslo
AS Agra Industrier Oslo
IDC Norge AS
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992

PARTICIPANTS FROM NCR
Erik Ruud
Dag Frode Johannssen Andreas Aass
Mars Olofsson
Bjørn Eide
Steinar Høistad Øivind Magnussen Trond A. Sørensen Sten Johansen
Jan Petter Salvesen Hans Nordstrøm
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992

ATTACHMENTS
NCR TOP END, brochure
NCR Model 3550, brochure
The World of NCR, brochure
Transaction processing for system users. The NCR TOP END software supports the new X/Open standard for transaction processing. It can be used against open database tools such as Informix, ORACLE and Sybase - including versions for parallel processing.
NCR's Model 3550 works under the new UNIX V.4 multiprocessor standard. It is available for OSI and otherwise X/Open approved. By combining up to eight Intel i486 processors - each at 50MHz - the new NCR machine can handle up to 320 (MIPS) million instructions per second. This means that it can power over 1,000 workstations - either directly or in a local area network (LAN).
An overview of NCR Corporation.
OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, September 11, 1992
===== NCR-Norway-1991-5.txt =====
Utfordringer og
muligheter med
 transaksjons-
prosessering i et
  åpent miljø.
       Et
  miniseminar
  arrangert av
NCR Corporation




NCR
An AT&T Company
AGENDA




09.15    Introduksjon v/Steinar Høistad, Adm. dir., NCR Norge AS

09.25    Hva en leder må vite om transaksjonsprosessering i et åpent miljø

         Traditional On Line Transaction Processing (OLTP) technology was
         characterised by a central computer - often a mainframe, unintelligent terminals,
         and a proprietary transaction Processing software development and runtime
         environment. Open OLTP is a computer mechanism that changes the state of
         ±e enterprise in real-time while using industry standards which support
         interoperability across a mixture of computing systems. Aberdeen Group
         believes that Open OLTP is now a mature enough technology that it should be
         seriously considered by enterprise management. The business issues that sup­
         port this conclusion include the advantages of downsizing, lower cost of
         ownership, and distributed computing.

         The presentation examines why OLTP is a powerful technology tool for
         business.The migration from traditional OLTP to OPEN OLTP, and the
         benefits it can provide. What buyers should look for in evaluating suppliers and
         Products is also discussed.

         Foreleser: Peter S. Kastner, Vice President, Aberdeen Group, Inc.

10.25    Pause

10.30    Synergieffekter mellom transaksjonsprosessering og relasjons­
         databaser i et åpent miljø

         The advent of multiple-vendor, multiple-machine, multiple-operating system
         environment opened the floodgate of choice for users of computer systems.
         Users were free to develop their applications on hardware provided by one
         vendor, while keeping their options to switch to hardware provided by another
         vendor. Availability of such technology caused a shift to Client/Server
         computing with multiple server hardware and operating system platforms. This
         approach, while permitting downsizing, introduced problems in the areas of
         administration, maintenance, and redundant data.

         Oracle Corporation believes that doing business in the 1990’s requires a
         re-examination of this philosophy. The trend will be towards Open OLTP
         systems as the backbone of critical business functions. This will require large
         massively parallel open hardware as well as an industry compliant, open relation
         database management system. In order to bring critical enterprise data on-line,
         the hardware end RDMS must provide high system availability, cost
         effectiveness, data integrity, performance scalability, and interoperability with
         other systems.

         The presentation describes how an organization can take advantage of Open
         OLTP and Open relation database technologies to enhance their competitive
         position through the 1990’s and into the next century.

         Foreleser: Sven Aamodt, Teknisk direktør, Oracle Norge AS




                 OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992
11.30    Pause

11.35    Fremtidens suksessfaktor ved transaksjonsprosessering under UNIX
         System V

         In 1990’s, business leaders are facing unprecedented challenges faced with
         shortened product and service life cycles and intensified global competition,
         toda/s managers must have instant access to information in order to
         successfully compete. It is no longer possible, or affordable, to re-invent infor­
         mation processing tools as user needs grow or expand. The definition and
         adoption of IT architectural standards is mandatory to release the goals of
         minimizing training and retraining concentrating on evolving business
         applications to provide real-world competitive advantages and maximizing
         information compatibility with other intemal and extemal organization through
         interoperable IT systems. Under the umbrella of the UNIX International AT­
         LAS architecture the Corporate Hub Environment defines the computing
         environment that provides business critical commercial processing capabilities
         centred on transaction processing under UNIX System V. Characteristically this
         environment will include large data bases, high availability, fast and predictable
         response times, a large user base and a reflection of business priorities.

         The presentation describes the scope of these characteristics, the technology
         enablers, and the products available now which provide the benefits of open,
         and interoperable systems.

         Foreleser: Scott Hansen, Managing Director, Unix International.

12.35.   Avslutning v/Steinar Høistad

12.50.   Lunsj




                 OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992
BIOGRAFI OVER FOREDRAGSHOLDERE



Peter S. Kastner,         Peter S. Kastner er visepresident med ansvar for
Aberdeen Group            “Commercial Systems Practice” i Aberdeen Group. Han
                          er en av bransjens ledende analytikere innenfor OLTP,
                          klient/tjenerarkitekturer, testing og analyser av applikasjo­
                          ner. Kastner har ledet flere studier vedrørende operativ­
                          system, programvare og databasesystem.

                          1 1990 forfattet han Aberdeens rapporter; “Transaction
                          Processing into 1990’s”og “The Hardware Suppliers”, og i
                          1991 rapporten “Evaluating Options in Microprocessor
                          Multiprocessing”. Han holder ofte foredrag på aktuelle
                          industrikonferanser. Han har holdt foredrag for Apple
                          Computer, ASK Ingres Corporation, DEC, Hewlett-
                          Packard, NCR og Stratus Computer.

                          Tidligere har Kastner vært leder for markedsføring og salg
                          i DEC, Prime, og Stratus Computer. I en periode var han
                          konsulent i Arthur D. Little Inc.

                          Peter S. Kastner har vært involvert i flere system utvik­
                          lingsprosjekter, med stormaskiner, minimaskiner og
                          arbeidsstasjoner, innenfor handel, bank og finans, helse­
                          vesen og offentlig sektor.


Scott Hansen,             Scott Hansen er “Managing Director” i Unix
Unix International        Intemationals avdeling i Europa. Han var tidligere ansatt i
                          AT&Ts EDB seksjon i USA. I den siste tiden i AT&T var
                          han “Application Development System Director” med
                          ansvar for utvikling og vedlikehold av UNIX for distribu-
                          sjonsmiljø.

                          I tillegg hadde han ansvaret for AT&Ts programvare­
                          produkter. I den forbindelse var han medvirkende i
                          beslutningen om valg av UNIX som operativsystem i
                          AT&Ts nettverksløsninger.

                          Scott Hansen har “Bachelor Science” grader i dataviten-
                          skap, bedriftsledelse og statistikk fra Kansas State Univer­
                          sity. Videre er han Master of Science i “Industrial Engi­
                          neering”. Hansen satt i X/Open’s styre på vegne av
                          AT&T.




                OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992
SITATER FRA KONSULENTER OG DATAPRESSEN



Dataquest/Ledgeway        "...The May 1991 merger with AT&T strengthened NCR ’s
                         position as an leader in open systems and cooperative
                         computing aeross standards. NCR absorbed AT&T’s
                         Computer Systems Division, folding AT&T’s substantial
                         communications and networking expertise and Services into its
                         offerings. ...”




Aberdeen Group, Inc.     ‘NCR has positioned itself in a high-growth area: open,
                         integrated systems based on industry standards. Its vision of
                         developing a world dass service portfolio reflects this position.


                          “Now you can get the best open OLTP environment on a wide
                         variety of systems. This (agreement with Independence
                         Technologies Inc., to port NCR TopEND to multiple systems)
                         is a milestone in the advencement towardopen OLTP. ...”




INFOWORLD                 “The pieces of the puzzle are rapidly falling into place. People
                         can now consider mission-critical OLTP on the price/
                         performance curve of open systems. ”

                          “...NCR (the combined operations of NCR and AT&T Data
                         Systems) is investing heavly in multiprocessor designs for
                         enterprise systems, workgrerup software, and hardware and
                         software extensions for pen and multimedia support. So its reps
                         can also walk into customeds Office and say with credibility
                         that NCR’s produets can solve real business problems. ”




               OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992
DELTAGERE



Aaraas, Halvor                 Den norske Bank AS                       Oslo
Aasen, Olav                    Novit AS                                 Trondheim
Bragstad, Thor                 Fokus Bank AS                            Trondheim
Einertsen, Terje               Teamco AS                                Oslo
Glendrange, Jan Petter         Fellesdata AS                            Oslo
Grongstad, Johanne             Computer Shop                            Oslo
Grødem, Knut                   Touche Ross                              Oslo
                               Management Consultans
Guneriussen, Trond             Statskonsult                             Oslo
Haakonsen, Per                 Forlagssentralen ANS                     Oslo
Hansen, Svein                  Norbås Prosjektet                        Oslo
Hauknes, Øivind                AS Union                                 Skien
Hesjedal, Oddvar               ISI                                      Oslo
Hil tveit, Øivind              Fellesdata AS                            Oslo
Johnsrud, Tom Fr.              Fellesdata AS                            Oslo
Kalleberg, Tor                 Sandefjordbanken (NBF)                   Sandefjord

Larsen, Jan Sigurd             Fellesdata AS                            Oslo
Larsen, Terje                  Den norske Bank AS                       Bergen

Lovett, Hilde M                Norsk Regnesentral                       Oslo

Lundby, Roar                   Bull AS                                  Oslo
Nilsen, Trygve                 AS Union                                 Skien

Nøkling, Lars                  Novit AS                                 Bergen

Olsen, Tom Evert               Bull AS                                  Oslo

Riise, Bjørn                   Sparebankenes brukerforening             Klæbu

Rosenkilde, Per Holte          IDC Norge AS                             Gjettum

Thorvaldsen, Thorvald          Landbruksdata AS                         Oslo

Underland, Ragnar              Luftforsvarets Forsyningskommando        Kjeller

Valstad, Per Bjarne            Novit AS                                 Trondheim
Vattekar, Odd                  Landbruksdata AS                         Oslo
Wikene, Erik                   AS Agra Industrier                       Oslo




                      OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992
DELTAGERE FRA NCR



Erik Ruud
Dag Frode Johannssen
Andreas Aass
Mars Olofsson
Bjørn Eide
Steinar Høistad
Øivind Magnussen

Trond A. Sørensen
Sten Johansen
Jan Petter Salvesen

Hans Nordstrøm




                      OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992
VEDLEGG



NCR TOP END,             Transaksjonsprosessering for system brukere. Program­
brosjyre                 varen NCR TOP END støtter den nye X/Open
                         standarden for transaksjonsprosessring. Den kan brukes
                         mot åpne databaseverktøy som Informix, ORACLE og
                         Sybase - inkludert i versjoner for parallellprosessering.



NCR Model 3550,          NCRs Model 3550 arbeider under den nye UNIX V.4
brosjyre                 multiprosessorstandarden. Den er tilgjengelig for OSI og
                         forøvrig X/Open godkjent. Ved å kombinere opptil åtte Intel
                         i486 prosessorer - hver på 50MHz - kan den nye NCR
                         maskinen håndtere opp til 320 (MIPS) millioner instruk­
                         sjoner i sekundet. Det betyr, at den kan drive over 1.000
                         arbeidsplasser - enten direkte eller i lokalnett (LAN).



The World of NCR,        En oversikt over NCR Corporation.
brosjyre




               OLTP seminar, NCR Norge AS, 11. september, 1992

===== NCR-Norway-bokmal-test-6.txt =====
Utfordringer og
muligheter med
 transaksjons-
prosessering i et
  åpent miljø.
