AberdeenGroup 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning for  
Emerging Industry-
Standard Platforms  
An Executive White Paper 
August 2003 
 
 
 
 
Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
260 Franklin Street 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 USA 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
www.aberdeen.com 
 


 
 
Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
Preface 
Industry-standard computing is based on Intel-compatible architecture, proces-
sors, and chip sets. Intel Architecture (IA), as industry-standard computing is also 
called, is at the heart of the majority of the world’s desktop, workstation, and 
server computers. Technology advancements this year and next year are creating 
opportunities for information technology (IT) organizations to choose computers 
with superior performance, fewer bottlenecks, and better administration at a lower 
labor cost — the “lower TCO” that everyone applauds. The three critical technol-
ogy building blocks of change are memory, systems management, and serial input-
output (I/O), which includes serial buses, graphics, and communications. The 
three technologies will complement advances in chip sets and processors and go 
beyond the typical generation-to-generation evolution. First appearing in volume 
32-bit servers and high-end workstations, these technology improvements are fol-
lowed in 2004 in multiprocessor servers, then 64-bit servers. 
This Executive White Paper alerts IT technologists and general business executives 
to these technology changes and the business benefits of the technology so that 
they may better plan for industry-standard computer acquisitions. A future com-
panion paper will look at desktop and mobile technology issues. 
Processors and Chip Sets Work Hand in Glove to Support Enterprise 
Workloads 
Intel is known as the microprocessor company. From the mid-1990s, IA32-based 
servers have taken on increasingly important and, now, business-critical transac-
tion processing, decision support, Web, and office workloads. Today, industry-
standard servers are used in some of the commercial and technical world’s tough-
est computing jobs. 
What is less well known, but of critical importance to IT executives, is that Intel 
has quietly built a stable of enterprise chip sets, the nervous system that controls 
access to I/O and memory by the microprocessor “brain.” Intel’s enterprise chip 
sets are primarily aimed at Intel Xeon-based servers and workstations with one or 
two processors. Intel also offers a chip set for servers based on two (or more) Intel 
Itanium 2 processors. Intel’s significant research and development commitment 
on enterprise chip sets results in servers that perform better and more reliably. In-
tel has shipped more than one million enterprise chip sets since the beginning of 
2002, primarily the E7501, E7505, E7205 for the Xeon processor family, and the 
E8870 for the Itanium 2. The field experience gained by Intel over this time has 
been cycled through the recent 875P high-end chip set for the Intel Pentium proc-
essor and into follow-on chip-set products that will support future Xeon and Ita-
nium 2 processors.  
Over this 18-month period of renewed Intel emphasis on enterprise chip sets, In-
tel-Architecture servers have continued to gain market segment share in a de-
 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 2 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
pressed global market. Enterprise buyers tell Aberdeen that they are confident in 
the reliability, performance, and value of servers containing Intel processors and 
chip sets, and that they recognize the effort and commitment that Intel is making. 
Moreover, Intel’s chip sets undergo a rigorous qualification and validation process 
that involves thousands of engineers and hundreds of millions of dollars. This ef-
fort leads to high quality and predictable, stable operation — all data center 
qualifications. 
One- and Two-Processor Enterprise Workstations and Servers 
Intel’s Xeon processors are widely used in workstations and infrastructure servers, 
which support one or two processors.  
Workstations using Xeon processors and the E7505 chip set offer fast AGP 8x sup-
port and over 4GB/second of memory bandwidth. This combination is winning de-
sign and rendering benchmarks and market segment share against proprietary 
RISC-based workstations. 
In volume two-way servers, the Xeon processor with the E7501 chip set supports 
large real memory space — to 16 GB — and three PCI (Peripheral Component In-
terconnect)-X I/O buses, along with dual Gigabit Ethernet support. The large 
memory addressability can be useful in high-performance computing applications. 
These features allow large Fortune 500 companies to handle their e-mail and 
workgroup computing applications where the data set is small and response time 
is important. 
In 2004, the next-generation Xeon processor, code-named Nocona by Intel, will 
debut at higher clock speeds. Nocona will be complemented by the Lindenhurst 
chip set, which is expected to be the industry’s first chip set to incorporate PCI 
Express serial I/O and DDR2 memory technology. 
Multiprocessor Xeon for 32-Bit Enterprise Servers 
Intel’s Xeon processor MP is widely used in multiprocessor servers for 32-bit en-
terprise applications, office automation, decision support, and other large com-
mercial and technical workloads. The Xeon Processor MP is seen in high-end serv-
ers with four to 32 processors, rivaling RISC servers in performance — most com-
monly at a lower acquisition cost. The Xeon MP is widely used for tier-3 32-bit 
workloads such as database, transaction processing, and enterprise applications. 
In the second half of 2004, a new generation of 32-bit server processors will ap-
pear, code-named Potomac. The Potomac processors will be supported by a new 
four-processor chip set, code-named Twin Castle, which will be Intel’s first recent 
four-way IA32 enterprise chip set effort since its reentrance into the server market 
segment in early 2002. New processors and chip sets intended for the multiproc-
essor market segment are introduced at a slower rate because of the longer (typi-
cally two years) refresh cycle. 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 3 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
Itanium 2 for 64-Bit Enterprise Workloads 
The Madison iteration of the Intel Itanium 2 64-bit microprocessor was released in 
mid-2003. The Itanium 2 is complemented by the Intel E8870 chip set as well as 
server-supplier-proprietary chip sets. The E8870 chip set was designed for two- to 
eight-way Itanium 2 servers. Larger systems can also be designed using the E8870 
chip set building blocks. The E8870 has extensive reliability, availability, and ser-
viceability (RAS) logic, befitting a mission-critical server well suited for large data-
bases, decision support, and other enterprise-class applications. In two-way con-
figurations, some computer suppliers are offering high-end workstations. 
The Itanium 2 performance is impressive for a relatively new architecture; the chip 
is winning numerous commercial and scientific benchmark tests and is picking up 
market segment share against high-end RISC/Unix and mainframe machines. High 
memory bandwidth combined with lots of number crunching capability is one rea-
son why this technology is increasingly used in scientific/technical applications and 
encryption. Large memory address space, along with other architectural advan-
tages such as EPIC instructions, makes the Itanium 2 attractive for large commer-
cial database-driven applications. 
Reducing the Memory Bottleneck 
Dual-Processor Workstations and Servers 
In mid-2003, memory is based on double data rate (DDR) synchronous dynamic 
random-access memory (SDRAM). With microprocessors gulping instructions and 
data at more than three billion cycles per second (GHz), the ability of the memory 
bandwidth to keep up with the processor bandwidth has been a significant tech-
nology problem — and a bottleneck in compute-intensive commercial and scien-
tific applications. DDR has the benefit of about twice the bandwidth of ordinary 
SDRAM. DDR266 and DDR333 have peak bandwidths per memory channel of 2.1 
GB/second and 2.6 GB/second, respectively. Recently introduced, DDR400 has a 
bandwidth of 3.2 GB/second; it is often used in two-channel configurations to 
achieve a peak bandwidth of 6.4 GB/second. Faster memory bandwidth, however, 
adversely impacts the amount of total memory that can be reliably populated in 
the system. 
A memory failure usually means a system crash, with the potential loss of data, 
transactions, and customer good will. Typically, workstations and servers today use 
server-grade memory, with error-correction capabilities that minimally include sin-
gle-bit error detection and correction (ECC). 
Next year’s server memory systems will be more robust. Aberdeen expects a num-
ber of mainframe-class memory technologies to migrate down from high-end Ita-
nium 2 microprocessors to multiprocessor-based servers, as well as the main-
stream volume servers: 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 4 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
• Memory mirroring keeps two copies of all memory. If one memory fails, 
the other is still there to keep on processing continuously. 
• Spare memory uses a single memory module as a spare, which costs less 
than memory mirroring. When a memory module fails or is taken offline 
by diagnostics, the spare is used to maintain the same amount of mem-
ory. 
• Memory scrubbing constantly tests memory parity for soft failures and 
can alert on a failing memory module, invoking a spare, if present. 
The benefits of higher memory availability are obvious, given a system crash as the 
outcome. Less obvious is the fact that typical server memory configurations have 
quadrupled over the past three years, as greater capacity has been introduced 
along with lower memory prices. Many more memory chips are present as poten-
tial failure points compared with the prior generation of servers. 
In 2004, Memory Steps Up to DDR2 
DDR2 is the second-generation DDR SDRAM. It will debut in 2004 with the label 
DDR2-400. One critical advantage of DDR2 over today’s DDR is in power con-
sumption. DDR2-400 draws half the power of the DDR400, and 40% less than 
DDR333. As power consumption generates heat and requires thermal engineering 
to alleviate it, a 50% decrease in power requirements, at a time when server mem-
ory sizes are growing rapidly, is beneficial, given the trend toward lower profile 
form factors such as 1U rack-mounted servers and blades.  
IT buyers will be able to select slower DDR266 or very fast DDR2-400 memory in 
servers at about the same power consumption rates. In addition, even value dual-
processor IA32 servers are able to configure up to 16 GB of memory using IA32 or 
Windows extensions — the memory capacity bottlenecks of a couple of years ago 
are long gone.  
As a result, higher system utilization, more efficient server consolidation, and lar-
ger applications in memory (e.g., Web caching servers) are increasingly chosen to 
run on industry-standard servers. 
Value Servers Get Server-Class Technology 
There are millions of servers around the world that are, in fact, desktops cast in a 
server role. In the past, server-class technology cost thousands of dollars more 
than a gussied-up desktop, so buyers often ignored the RAS risks and bought the 
desktop. Fortunately, the price gap has decreased considerably in the past two 
years. Looking forward, Aberdeen believes that there is no economic reason not to 
buy the reliability, availability, and serviceability of a true server for a server’s role. 
Introduced in Q2 2003, the 875P Canterwood chip set with Pentium 4 processors 
is being used as a performance desktop and entry workstation. The Canterwood 
supports ECC memory, serial ATA disk drives, dual-channel DDR400 memory with 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 5 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
performance acceleration technology (PAT), and low-overhead Gigabit Ethernet. 
This fall, the Canterwood-ES chip set will enable true servers at value prices by 
combining server-grade PCI-X I/O with many of the Canterwood features. 
Systems Management Gets Simpler in a Multivendor World 
Aberdeen research shows that about half the total cost of data center ownership 
(TCO) is the labor of the people who operate and administer the systems. IT man-
agement has been increasingly focused on data center labor costs owing to the re-
cession, server-consolidation projects, and continuing demands by executive man-
agement to “drive costs even lower.” Systems management plays a key role in this 
business process.  
The Intelligent Platform Management Initiative (IPMI) is an open hardware-
management interface that uses a standardized message-passing interface that ab-
stracts the processor and various devices. IPMI, in use since 1998, is one of the 
tools used to build the systems-management software products that help many en-
terprises lower data center server-management costs. With more than 150 adopter 
companies, IPMI support should be a checklist requirement by IT managers when 
evaluating server infrastructure, as IPMI helps enable management software that 
works across heterogeneous server system hardware. 
IPMI provides IT infrastructure managers with a benefit-rich platform for managing 
system hardware in the datacenter: 
• Instrumentation in server motherboard hardware, a feature not found 
in desktops used as servers. 
• Standards-based architecture for systems management, self-healing, and 
asset inventory — across numerous hardware and software vendors’ 
products — eliminates the need for customized software on diverse 
server platforms. 
• Interoperability between hardware and software management. 
• Increased RAS through a comprehensive hierarchy of sensors (e.g., tem-
perature, memory allocation) that report alerts to remote consoles. 
• A common architecture that spans the three-tier server architecture 
common in modern data centers, as well as across industry-standard and 
legacy computers. 
• Reduction in TCO in data center operations and administration labor 
owing to the use of common software user interfaces across multiple 
servers from multiple vendors. 
• Version 1.5 of the IPMI specification, released in 2001, is being delivered 
in systems today. Version 1.5 included several important enhancements 
over Version 1.0, including a message-passing architecture and exten-


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 6 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
sions for monitoring and reporting across data center LANs and to re-
mote locations via serial ports, which makes it less complex for firms to 
deploy a comprehensive enterprise systems-management process. 
The benefits of IPMI 1.5-based products to IT organizations will be: 
• Greater release-level insulation between hardware and software 
changes. Newer hardware need not mandate an upgrade to a newer sys-
tems management software release. 
• Common user interfaces and procedures for LAN/WAN and dial-up loca-
tions, lowering training costs and reducing the opportunity for error. 
• More comprehensive predictive failure alerts allow operations to remove 
a failing server (component) before suffering downtime. Cluster failover 
can occur predictably and gracefully. Self-healing will become more 
commonplace. 
• Because of better failure prediction and self-healing, system availability 
at the application level should improve. With experience, higher avail-
ability levels can be factored into service level agreements. 
• Improved auto-provisioning will dramatically lower labor costs in con-
figuring a new server, a common task among growing tier-1 server farms 
and clusters. 
• Improved asset tracking reduces the need for physical inventory labor. 
• Storage management and virtualization are supported, allowing for im-
provements in harnessing the collective power of data center servers 
and storage, which leads to greater aggregate capacity utilization. 
Aberdeen research indicates that all of the above benefits are recognizable to data 
center operations management. 
PCI-X 2.0 Promises to Double and Quadruple Performance Beginning in 
2004 
PCI is today’s computer industry standard developed by the PCI Special Interest 
Group (PCI-SIG) for interconnecting a microprocessor and attached devices, such 
as disk drives and Ethernet controllers, via a parallel I/O bus. Devices connect to 
the PCI bus using adapter cards, which fit into slots on the computer mother-
board. PCI-based I/O products are a virtual universal standard in desktop PCs and 
servers. PCI moves 64 bits in parallel every 66-MHz bus clock cycle, which limits 
the aggregate data bandwidth on a PCI bus to 532 MB/second. The most recent 
generation of servers since 2000 feature an improved PCI, called PCI-X, which dou-
bles the I/O bus bandwidth of the PCI specification to 1.06 GB/second while 
running at 133 MHz. PCI-X cards are backwards compatible, meaning they fit into 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 7 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
previous generations of 64-bit PCI slots (though not into conventional 32-bit PCI 
slots).  
The PCI-X 2.0 specification proposes to further increase the bandwidth by upping 
the clock rate to 266 MHz, resulting in 2.1 GB/second peak capacity, and again to 
533 MHz with 4.2 GB/second peak capacity. PCI-X 266 products are not expected 
to be in production before 2004, whereas PCI-X 533 is still at the specifications de-
velopment stage. 
PCI Express Serial I/O Represents a Significant Change in Computer Archi-
tecture in 2004 
Serial I/O represents the most far-reaching of the technology changes in server ar-
chitecture that will face IT planners in 2004. Not just industry-standard servers are 
affected. All data-center-class server suppliers will begin a migration to serial I/O 
capabilities in 2004. This new technology will take the form of PCI Express (PCI-E), 
another standard developed by the PCI SIG. Eventually, almost all desktop and 
server I/O will use serial-based technology, so it is important for IT executives to 
understand the opportunities and issues. 
PCI Express Is Serial, Not Parallel 
PCI Express is a serial bus architecture, not parallel. Bits are sent down the signal 
cable one after the other — serially — without the synchronization requirements 
that parallel buses such as PCI-X need. The architecture is layered so that copper, 
optical, or future cabling can be used without affecting higher layer software — an 
investment protection. 
Each PCI-E data lane operates at 2.5 GHz and is referred to as “x1.” Up to 16 lanes 
can be aggregated (x16) for a bandwidth of 4 GB/second. This aggregate band-
width can be divided into a scalable width. For example, x4 InfiniBand and 10-
gigabit Ethernet will require four 2.5-GHz PCI-E data lanes to achieve 10 
Gb/second in throughput. 
Attributes and Capabilities of PCI Express 
The key attributes of the PCI Express architecture include the following: 
• The architecture is layered, so details can be hidden from higher layers. 
This should lead to a long life for PCI-E, which Aberdeen estimates at a 
decade or more. 
• There are RAS features that include data integrity checking, advanced er-
ror logging and reporting through IPMI, and hot-plug capability. Hot-
plugging new I/O channels has an obvious benefit in reduced downtime, 
but PCI-E standards-based hot-plugging means it will be possible to mix 
and match peripherals, which is generally not possible today. Thus, dif-


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 8 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
ferent vendors’ Fibre Channel adapters should hot-plug into another 
vendors I/O card cage. 
• I/O will be consolidated and unified across I/O buses, meaning more 
configuration flexibility and less duplication of electronics, leading to 
lower overall server acquisition costs. 
• Advanced power and configuration management will improve configu-
ration flexibility and on-the-fly changes in computing. The “computer 
utility” is a lot easier and less costly to operate in a PCI-E environment. 
• Workstation graphics will double the throughput of today’s 8x AGP 
products, given the scalable I/O of PCI-E. 
• Next-generation media-based I/O is architected with support for virtual 
channels, isochrony, and quality-of-service levels. 
• PCI Express is software compatible with PCI-X and PCI. This simple 
statement has enormous positive implications for IT operations: PCI Ex-
press works with PCI-X drivers, which have been battle tested at thou-
sands of sites. 
Aberdeen expects the following I/O capabilities to become available in 2004 using 
PCI-E technology: 
• Serial graphics will replace the AGP graphics card, delivering 4 
GB/second over PCI-E, or twice the throughput of AGP 8x. This will im-
prove workstation rendering times, as well as allow more and deeper 
textures in real-time simulations. 
• The throughput of PCI Express x8 links roughly doubles that of PCI-X 
266 with PCI Express x4 links comparable to PCI-X 266. The greatest 
gains will be realized when the size of the data transferred is relatively 
small (i.e., in Ethernet or iSCSI implementations). Improved throughput 
will benefit server-to-server Gigabit Ethernet communications in clusters, 
grid compute farms, and in using iSCSI disk arrays. 
• Serial disk connections will proliferate for both the SCSI drives used in 
transaction processing and ATA drives used for mid-line storage. Serial 
storage-in-a-box implementations will support both SCSI and ATA drives 
in the same enclosure. Moreover, PCI-E I/O connectors for FibreChannel 
will coexist with other I/O cards.  
• PCI Express x8 links is capable of meeting the sustained bandwidth re-
quired for 10GbE applications. 
• InfiniBand, a standard for low-latency data center communications, is 
likely to blossom with PCI-E. Native InfiniBand at 4x (10 Gb/second) 
speeds will no longer be limited by the PCI-X bus. Aberdeen expects 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 9 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
server-to-server, server-to-storage, and TCP offload engine (TOE) uses 
for InfiniBand in the data center in 2004. 
• The PCI SIG is working on a new totally enclosed Server I/O Module 
form factor specification to enable true I/O hot plug-and-play while re-
ducing handling damage. This new form factor is targeted at server and 
workstation applications.  
PCI Express Moves into Data Center Infrastructure Next to PCI-X 
PCI Express is the PCI SIG’s long-term successor to PCI-X, with transition oppor-
tunities in volume dual-processor platforms beginning in 2004. In a matchup of 
PCI-E versus PCI-X 266, Aberdeen’s nod is to PCI Express as offering more theo-
retical bandwidth and a long-life architecture while still using much of today’s 
tried-and-true PCI-based systems software. The expectation is that new 2004 plat-
forms will incorporate PCI/PCI-X expansion slots, as well as PCI Express slots. With 
platforms that support both existing and new I/O expansion technologies, users 
can be ensured of the continued operation of their current hardware while start-
ing the transition to the new PCI Express serial I/O technology. Prior to the deliv-
ery of PCI Express, Aberdeen recommends a business-as-usual approach based on 
PCI-X 133. 
Aberdeen Conclusions  
As IT begins to plan its way out of recession, industry-standard servers and work-
stations are playing a larger role than ever before. By Aberdeen measures, the lat-
est industry-standard technology costs less, overall, than predecessor products and 
provides better performance, higher RAS levels, and lower operations costs. Indus-
try-standard servers and workstations are here to stay. 
Driven by the demand of enterprise customers for rock-solid computing solutions, 
Intel has of late devoted considerable effort to solutions engineering — the inte-
gration, validation, and testing of processor, chip set, motherboard, and software 
drivers to create a known, predictable quantity. Intel’s efforts at this time include 
one- to eight-way Itanium 2 solutions and one- and two-way server and work-
station Xeon-based IA32 solutions. Market acceptance, measured at more than one 
million units, has been a strong endorsement of Intel’s efforts. Intel’s efforts de-
serve close scrutiny, as they are leading to higher quality computers. 
In building a four-way Xeon MP next year, Intel is extending its own validated 
products and technology to cover about 95% of the 32-bit server and workstation 
market segment. Industry partners provide the high-end, low-volume IA32 sys-
tems. Meanwhile, Itanium 2 at one- to eight-way is currently picking up steam, 
with strong partner support for this recent architecture in very high-end systems 
above eight-ways. 


Planning for Emerging Industry-Standard Platforms 
 10 
To provide us with your feedback on this research, please go to www.aberdeen.com/feedback . 
Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
260 Franklin Street 
Boston, Massachusetts 
02110 
USA 
 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
© 2003 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
All rights reserved 
August 2003 
Aberdeen Group is a computer and communications  
research and consulting organization closely monitoring 
enterprise-user needs, technological changes, and mar-
ket developments. 
Based on a comprehensive analytical framework,  
Aberdeen provides fresh insights into the future of  
computing and networking and the implications for  
users and the industry. 
Aberdeen Group performs projects for a select group of 
domestic and international clients requiring strategic 
and tactical advice and hard answers on how to manage 
computer and communications technology. This docu-
ment is the result of research performed by Aberdeen 
Group. It was sponsored by Intel Corporation. Aberdeen 
Group believes its findings are objective and represent 
the best analysis available at the time of publication. 
 
 
 
Aberdeen is excited by the technology improvements represented by DDR2, IPMI, 
and PCI Express, among others. Beginning next year, these technologies will allow 
industry-standard computers to scale to larger workloads with higher availability 
levels at lower TCO. The trend is definitely in the right direction. 
With the rapid advances in industry-standard servers and workstations, today’s 
products are considerably faster and more reliable than the previous generation. 
This fact — aided by attractive costs of ownership — is driving and will continue to 
drive server consolidation initiatives at many enterprises.  
As a result of all the factors discussed above, Aberdeen expects industry-standard 
servers to continue gaining market segment share — a sign that IT buyers are 
pleased with the value they receive. 
