
April 24, 2003
PC Replacements: Lawyers, Auditors, and Common Sense Rules
Keywords: personal computers, PCs, CIO planning, information technology planning, IT planning, PC replacement, PC acquisition, life cycle, life-cycle, IT best practices, CIO platforms, CIO personal computing, desktops, notebooks, laptops, business computers


Too many businesses have been hanging on to Windows 98 and NT Workstation 4-generation desktop computers.  IT managers know that these PCs are past their prime, but have met stiff resistance from CFOs and CEOs who would rather hoard the cash saved by endlessly postponing capital asset replacement.  Aberdeen explains why it’s time to throw the words “fiduciary responsibility” around the boardroom, and get a PC replacement cycle going soon.

It’s Ugly Out There in Cube-Land
There are more than 50,000,000 aging PCs sitting on desks in corporate cubes and offices around the world.  They were built and sold before the millennium — in fact, many were bought circa 1998 in anticipation of Y2K problems with even older Microsoft DOS and Windows 3.1 PCs.  Small businesses often purchased consumer machines with Windows 98, and larger enterprises installed Windows NT desktops as the “fat clients” of Y2K-generation application enhancements.  
Fast forward to mid-2003.  Those machines, dusty monitors surrounded with sticky notes and keyboards showing distinct signs of biological activity, are still operating, which is the problem.  
If all those PCs just died with a hard-drive whine and a puff of smoke, the IT and corporate management issue would be simple:  buy a new computer with an up-to-date operating system.  But PCs don’t all expire on some arbitrary date, such as the day the computer is completely depreciated.  The computers keep running, more or less, the way they have for four or five years.  Which is why so many executives have repeatedly used the low risk “no way” answer to requests for a new generation of business PC replacements.
“Software Never Wears Out”
Non-technical executives believe that as long as the PC hardware keeps running, the PC software will keep running.  This is true, but only in a vacuum under laboratory conditions.
The fact is that software does wear out.  PC software is programmed and supported by businesses which need to be efficient and profitable, just like their customers.  Ford only guarantees spare parts for five years after a car is built.  Guess what?  Microsoft will only support an operating system for five years after it is introduced.
There are two parts to Microsoft’s support policies which need to be understood clearly by the CEO.  First, Microsoft products that are past the support dates cannot have support contracts, so telephone remediation ceases, and there are no new service packs.  Second, security hot fixes are no longer provided, meaning newly discovered security bugs in non-supported products won’t get fixed by Microsoft and thus become an attractive entrée for hackers.
W95.Tenrobot is a memory-resident file appender that only infects files when it is executed on a Windows 95/98/Me system.  It was discovered on April 3rd, and is a “latest threat” at Symantec’s web site.  W95.Tenrobot gives a hacker remote access to a computer through IRC.  This virus shows that old software is still very attractive to the bad guys.
Windows 98 and Windows NT have no facilities to indicate that a machine has been hacked, unlike more recent versions where at least a trail is left behind.
Windows NT 4.xx goes into the non-support stage on June 30, 2003 and Windows 98/SE on January 16, 2004.  It is logical to assume that support reductions by other hardware and software suppliers will be influenced by those dates.
Act Two: The Auditors Enter…
Aberdeen Group believes that corporate desktops which are left vulnerable to security problems of unknown risk represent an unacceptable information technology practice.  A Big Four accounting firm partner indicated that his firm’s auditors, as they did during the Year 2000 period, will look askance at client’s running mission-critical business processes on unsupported and vulnerable computers.
… Followed by the Lawyers
The corporate attorney we spoke with asked to see a copy of this article, saying his firm had a lot of old machines.  He said there could be circumstances, such as knowing the use of old PCs might result in an enterprise catastrophe, which could lead to a claim of negligence.  But his more insightful comment was that no corporate executive wants to become a laughing stock by doing something stupid that harms the business yet is avoidable.
Looking down the road, we think keeping Win 98-era PCs around much longer will move from the executive prudent category to the stupid.
It’s a Great Time for a PC Replacement Cycle
If you buy our arguments above and are still reading, then we have good news: mid-2003 is an auspicious time for starting or accelerating a PC replacement cycle:
    • Windows XP Pro service pack 1 is out in the field and working well indeed.  No stability problems here.  A great 
client OS on today’s more powerful desktops — and laptops.
    • Windows Server 2003 brings a new round of support servers, notably Exchange 2003 and SQL Server.  These are more efficient users of network and server resources.
    • Office 2003 will be out in a few months, along with new collaboration options.  Definitely worth evaluating.
    • Intel’s new Springdale chipset inaugurates an eighteen month period of platform and software image stability.  Features include a fast 800 MHz front-side bus, better graphics, and more efficient Ethernet handling.
    • Intel’s Pentium 4 microprocessors with Hyper Threading are now mainstream. They are better at dealing with the multi-tasking that is prevalent in the operating system, as well as thread-aware applications.
    • About one-third of corporate PC purchases this year will be notebooks.  The Intel Centrino wireless laptops feature a long battery life and have the benefits of work-wireless productivity.
At Aberdeen’s PC Deals, business PC prices on our reference desktop including Windows XP Pro and Office XP Pro licenses run from $1,250 to $1,400 this month from the top suppliers.  That works out to roughly $2 a day over 3-4 years in capital asset costs.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Last year at this time Aberdeen was a company filled with those old PCs described above.  We did not at all like spending hard cash in a down economy to upgrade our PC ecosystem.  But we analyzed the business situation and concluded that we could not afford the aggravation and potential disruption to our knowledge-worker-driven business of not doing so.  Tough medicine, we concluded, but common sense.
For those businesses, which are at the tipping point — especially the small-to-medium ones lacking a 24x7 global IT operations department — we say it is time to crank up the planning for the recession-disrupted PC replacement cycle and get with the 21st century.  
Tell the C-levels that your organization may be able to limp through the next year or so, but at an increasing risk to individual productivity and business-process continuity.  
~ Peter S. Kastner
Abstract
InSight title: PC Replacements: Lawyers, Auditors, and Common Sense Rules
Date April 24, 2003
The economic recession has stalled PC replacements at many penny-pinching enterprises because the old machines are still operating.  Now, time has caught up with Microsoft’s operating system support life-cycle.  In the next eight months, Windows NT 4.xx and Windows 98/SE — installed on over 50 million business desktops around the world — will no longer get updates or security patches.  Prudent businesses should consider accelerating their PC replacements.  The good news is, this is an excellent time to start planning a PC acquisition cycle

Author Peter Kastner
Coverage Area:  CIO — Personal Computing    

