The Data Warehouse: 2 Years Later... Lessons Learned

Copyright CAUSE 1994. This paper was presented at the 1994 
CAUSE Annual Conference held in Orlando, FL, November 29-
December 2, and is part of the conference proceedings 
published by CAUSE. Permission to copy or disseminate all or 
part of this material is granted provided that the copies are 
not made or distributed for commercial advantage, that the 
CAUSE copyright notice and the title and authors of the 
publication and its date appear, and that notice is given 
that copying is by permission of CAUSE, the association for 
managing and using information resources in higher education. 
To copy or disseminate otherwise, or to republish in any 
form, requires written permission from CAUSE. For further 
information: CAUSE, 4840 Pearl East Circle, Suite 302E, 
Boulder, CO 80301; 303-449-4430; e-mail 
info@cause.colorado.edu


THE DATA WAREHOUSE: 2 YEARS LATER
LESSONS LEARNED


John D. Porter and John J. Rome
Arizona State University



Abstract

A data warehouse is often the first client/server application 
that institutions attempt. Such was the case at Arizona State 
University (ASU). Two years ago, ASU initiated a project that 
brought together student, financial and human resources data 
in an integrated data warehouse. In this presentation, we 
plan to share the lessons learned after two years of work. 
Some of those lessons include: learning new technologies, 
understanding warehousing concepts, integrating data, 
designing the warehouse, marketing the idea, finding 
resources, establishing "officialness" of data, evaluating 
impact on Data Administration, defining data, making a 
production system, prioritizing information going into the 
warehouse, data access tools, training and security. We plan 
to share our success stories as well as our challenges. There 
will be a discussion of how the ASU Data Warehouse fits in 
the University's information architecture, future plans and a 
live demonstration showcasing the ease of use and power of 
this innovative information resource.


THE DATA WAREHOUSE: 2 YEARS LATER
LESSONS LEARNED

It's amazing that the words data warehouse have become such a 
glamorous, sexy expression[1]


Introduction

To remain competitive in today's business climate, an 
organization needs a solid foundation of quality data. 
Institutions of higher education need this capability as much 
as Fortune 500 companies. To give colleges and universities 
the "edge," many are turning to data warehousing. These 
institutions see the data warehouse as the de facto source of 
quality data for tactical and strategic decision making. Some 
critics believe data warehousing adds to an organization's 
information problem by adding yet another data source. 
However, the success organizations are experiencing with the 
data warehouse is evident. Data warehousing is a solid 
business strategy for the 1990s.

In this paper, we share the lessons learned from Arizona 
State University's (ASU's) data warehousing experiences. 
Building a data warehouse is extremely complex and takes 
commitment from both the information technology department 
and the business analysts of the institution. It takes 
planning, hard work, dedication and time to create a 
relational database management system (RDBMS) that delivers 
the right data to the right user. A data warehouse excites, 
but also disappoints. ASU's data warehouse is not a panacea 
for all the university's data woes, but a darn good start.


Data Warehousing Popular...But Not New

Data warehousing is not new. Data warehousing reminds us of 
an old mainframe concept from the mid-1970s: take data out of 
production databases, clean it up a bit, and load the data 
into an end-user database. International Business Machines 
Corporation (IBM) was first to coin the phrase "information 
warehouse" in late 1991. IBM's original concept met with 
skepticism because accessing non-relational data stores (such 
as IDMS(TM) IMS(TM) or VSAM(TM)) was too complex and degraded 
operational system performance. Based on these experiences, 
experts now agree that a warehouse needs to be a separate 
data store built with an RDBMS. While names such as 
"information factory" or "information refinery" surfaced and 
went, "data warehouse" is now the generally accepted term.

     Definition

The most widely recognized definition of a warehouse is a 
subject-oriented, integrated, time variant, non-volatile 
collection of data in support of management's decision making 
process.[2] Subject-oriented means the data warehouse focuses 
on the high-level entities of the business; in higher 
education's case, subjects such as students, courses, 
accounts, and employees. This is in contrast to operational 
systems,which deal with processes such as student 
registration or rolling up financial accounts. Integrated 
means the data is stored in a consistent format (i.e., naming 
conventions, domain constraints, physical attributes and 
measurements). For example, ASU's production systems have 
four unique coding schemes for ethnicity. In the data 
warehouse, there is only one coding scheme. Time variant 
means the data associates with a point in time (i.e., 
semester, fiscal year, and pay period). Lastly, non-volatile 
means the data doesn't change once it gets into the 
warehouse. At ASU, even if a person's gender was unreported 
in a previous semester, the warehouse won't go back in 
history to correct that.

     Use Increasing

In higher education, glimpses of data warehousing exist in 
the file extracts which institutional research departments 
receive or the end-user reporting databases that information 
technology provides. Consequently, data warehousing is 
nothing new; it is an old concept with a new name and better 
technology. The data warehouse is likely to become the 
cornerstone of client/server activity in 1995.[3] So popular 
is the notion, that a recent META Group report indicates 90% 
of their clients are undertaking warehouse initiatives, up 
from less than 10% just a year ago.[4] Similar trends are 
occurring in higher education, judging from the number of 
inquiries about ASU's data warehousing efforts. Some of the 
universities developing warehouse capabilities include 
Stanford and the University of Michigan. In the business 
market, analysts estimate the industry will grow to $2.1 
billion by 1998, almost three times the 1993 total of $753 
million.[5] Some of the major players vying for this money 
include IBM, Hewlett-Packard Co., Oracle Corp., Sybase, Inc., 
AT&T GIS and SAS Institute, Inc.; as well as Prism Solutions, 
Inc. and Red Brick Systems, companies already established in 
the warehouse market.


ASU's Warehouse Development

     History

Development of ASU's data warehouse started in the summer of 
1992 as an effort championed by the Department of Data 
Administration. Negotiations with an RDBMS vendor and a UNIX 
workstation vendor resulted in a one-year "lease" of their 
products for the cost of the annual maintenance contract 
(approximately $8000). While getting the warehouse server in 
place, over 20 companies agreed to provide complimentary 
copies of their data access tools. Although many of the 
access tools reviewed were in their adolescence, accessing 
data was much easier with these graphical user interface 
(GUI) tools than with the fourth generation tools in use. 
After successfully connecting to the warehouse server through 
the network middleware, Data Administration started compiling 
minimum hardware and software requirements for Macintosh(R) 
and PC/Windows(TM) machines.

A warehouse team of twelve individuals from Data 
Administration and Information Technology formed a 
development team to "prove" the warehouse concept. The team 
selected a representative group of ASU staff to serve as 
pilot users to test the data warehouse and access software. 
During thenext few months, the team designed a student 
warehouse model based on over 200 questions, which the pilot 
users considered difficult to answer using current 
information resources. By extracting data from the 
operational IDMS database and loading that data into a 
Sybase(R)SQLServer(TM) database, the first client/server 
application was in place at ASU.

During 1993, many of the original warehouse team shifted back 
to their regular duties, which left the team with a core of 
about five people. That core group has remained intact, 
receiving additional help from ASU's Institutional Research 
Office and business area improvement groups (BAlGs). The 
BAlGs, organized to improve ASU's operational and 
informational data processing capabilities, contribute 
significantly to ASU's data warehousing project. Meanwhile, 
Data Administration initiated formal classes to train users 
on the warehouse. To date, there are over 150 trained 
warehouse users, with two classes being taught each month. 
The goal is to train 1,000 warehouse users, approximately 20% 
of ASU's full-time work force.

Before the production release of the data warehouse to ASU, 
the team introduced a logo for the warehouse (see Figure 1). 
Presentations, warehouse brochures, training materials and 
other documentation display this logo. This simple, yet 
effective, design helps individuals identify with ASU's data 
warehouse, establishing the warehouse as a distinct entity.


(Figure 1 not available in ASCII text version)


     Methodology

Methodologies assist in managing a project's development. 
Formal principles, practices and procedures comprise a 
methodology. Examples of formal methodologies include Martin, 
Chen/Bachman, IRM, etc. The best definition of a methodology 
is Paul Strassmann's. He defines methodology as "a procedure 
that I understand and like." At ASU, the data warehouse team 
"understands" and "likes" the concepts of William ("Bill") 
Inmon. Reading any literature about data warehousing without 
seeing Inmon's name is rare. He was the first to coin the 
phrase "data warehouse," and is the evangelical voice on the 
concepts and benefits of data warehousing. In developing 
ASU's data warehouse, the warehouse team follows Inmon's ten 
critical success factors (see Figure 2). ASU's warehouse team 
still revisits these principles.


Inmon's Ten Critical Success Factors

1.  Separation of operational and warehouse data and
    processing.
    (i.e., different data and processing, different
    technologies, serve different communities.)
2.  Data volume management.
    (i.e., sheer volume defeats purpose, partitioning for
    performance.)
3.  Coexistence with older legacy systems.
    (i.e., warehouse not rewrite of operational system,
    remember $ invested in legacy systems.)
4.  Feedback loop implementation.
    (i.e., not single massive effort but iterative, users
    initially only give rough estimates of need.)
5.  Rigorous and proactive treatment of metadata.
    (i.e., store directory of data, maps data between
    operational system & warehouse.)
6.  Data integration.
    (i.e., warehouse fed from diverse & unintegrated data
    sources, time consuming & difficult.)
7.  Proper user mindset.
    (i.e., users operate in discovery mode, warehouse
    architects understand and react quickly.)
8.  Knowledge of historical versus current-value data.
    (i.e., warehouse not updated, serves management, what-if
    processing, data driven.)
9.  Cost justification.
    (i.e., after warehouse power unleashed, support comes but
    not based on cost justification.)
10. Knowledge that existing systems aren't perfect.
    (i.e., can't wait until operational systems cleaned up,
    build independent of reengineering.)

Figure 2. Inmon's Critical Success Factors in Building a Data 
Warehouse.[6]


     Architecture

ASU's data warehouse resides in a client/server environment. 
[Client/server is an emerging computing architecture where 
processing occurs on both the server and client, radically 
different from the mature centralized world of the 
mainframe.] As seen in Figure 3, we extract data from the 
mainframe and load it into a UNIX server running an RDBMS. 
ASU's warehouse server is a Sun(R) Sparc 630(TM) with 512 
megabytes of memory and two processors, running the Sun(R) 
Solaris 2.3(TM) operating system. The RDBMS is Sybase 
SQLServer release 1 0.x. Users connect through Ethernet to 
the warehouse over ASU's network backbone via Transmission 
Control Protocol/lnternet Protocol (TCP/IP). [TCP/IP is the 
predominant network protocol used by UNIX systems attached to 
Ethernet and ASU's "preferred protocol."] The suggested GUI 
data access tool is DataPrism(TM) from Brio Technology, Inc., 
which runs identically in both the Macintosh and Windows 
environment. Microsoft Access(R) and Q+E(TM) from Intersolv, 
Inc. are some of the other tools used.

GUI tools build the structured query language (SQL) requests 
and bring the results back to the client machine. [SQL is the 
dominant query language for accessing relational databases 
and accepted by most non-relational databases in a 
standardized form.] The retrieved data exists on the client 
machine. This process is much different from the 3270 
protocols the users are accustomed to, where the client 
machine is a "dumb" terminal connected to a mainframe. With 
client/server architecture, the data existing on the client 
machine is both empowering and liberating. The users "own" 
the data, cutting and pasting at will, using their favorite 
client tools (i.e., spreadsheet, word processor, graphic 
tools).


(Figure 3 not available in ASCII text version)


Modeling and Design

As business requirements and database technology become more 
sophisticated, the need for data modeling and design 
increases. ASU uses an "upper" computer aided software 
engineering (CASE) tool to design the warehouse. However, the 
entity/relationship (E/R) diagramming function and the object 
repository are the only features of the CASE tool used. [The 
E/R diagram is a pictorial representation of entities, the 
vital business relationships between the entities, and the 
attributes or fields used to describe the entities.] The E/R 
diagramming tool creates a graphical representation of the 
data in the data warehouse and automates the creation of data 
definition language (DDL), the technical language used to 
create the warehouse's tables, views and indexes. The object 
repository insures consistent definitions and characteristics 
of fields in the data warehouse. While an upper CASE tool is 
not imperative in building a data warehouse, it does help 
automate the development process and the E/R diagrams produce 
"road maps" to the data.

Designing a data warehouse is an iterative process. Warehouse 
models change as much as 50% after completion of the design. 
Designing a data warehouse is different from designing an 
operational system. First, the data content of the model is 
different. The warehouse wants data with a high value for 
executive decision making, whereas the data content of an 
operational system is more requirements driven. Second, since 
data is often unavailable, referential integrity in a data 
warehouse is sometimes inherently wrong. [Referential 
integrity is a feature of database management systems that 
ensures that each foreign key value has a matching primary 
key value.] In an operational system, business rules 
(relationships in an E/R model) dictate that an entity must 
have a relationship with another entity. In a data warehouse. 
that may or may not be the case. For example, in an 
operational system, a student must have an address. If that 
address is not available to the operational system, the 
ability to add that student to the warehouse still must 
exist.

There are four basic types of tables in ASU's data warehouse: 
data tables. Iookup tables, virtual tables and summarized 
tables. Data tables contain raw data, extracted at the unit 
record level from the operational system. Lookup tables are 
code tables, defining the cryptic coding schemes that exist 
in the operational data. Lookup tables save space, improve 
flexibility, and allow the description of a code value to 
change while retaining its meaning. Virtual tables are views 
into the warehouse data. Views simplify the user's perception 
of a data warehouse, presenting data in a different way or 
restricting access to certain data (i.e., class roster 
appears as a single table, but the data resides physically on 
multiple tables). Lastly, summarized tables contain 
summarized data. These tables improve response time to 
frequently queried data and may become the foundation for 
subsequently developed executive information systems (EIS).

Database design is a creative process. In fact, given the 
same set of requirements, two designers usually produce 
different but acceptable solutions. Often, in database 
design, it is easier to just do it, than explain exactly what 
you did.[7] ASU's warehouse team follows the design 
guidelines in Figure 4.


            ASU'S WAREHOUSE DESIGN GUIDELINES

  *  Identify major subjects or topics (i.e., define as
     tables on warehouse).
  *  Add an element of time to the tables (i.e., semester,
     fiscal year).
  *  Name fields in the tables or views appropriately (i.e.,
     naming standards).
  *  ( Add derived fields when necessary (i.e., calculated
     age, GPA).
  *  Duplicate data if necessary (i.e., to decrease number of
     tables users need).
  *  Exclude extraneous fields found in operational files
     (i.e., flags).
  *  Create logical tables or views for ease of use (i.e.,
     class roster w/ names). 
  *  Take security into design considerations. 
  *  Determine if data model answers business questions.

     Figure 4. Warehouse Design Guidelines.


ASU's Warehouse Data Issues

     What Data to Collect

A data warehouse must deliver the right data to the right 
people. However, the data warehouse may not be able to 
deliver all the data people want. People are always asking 
new questions, so predicting what they need is difficult. We 
started by asking users what data they wanted. Users e-mail 
or write down their questions, and send them to Data 
Administration. Another good starting point is to look at the 
data going to the institutional research department and the 
data included in official university reports (e.g., data 
provided to government agencies like EEOC, IPEDS, or NCES). 
Our experience is that warehouse users quickly let us know 
what data they want.

     Update Frequency

A data warehouse must deliver the right data to the right 
people, at the right time. What is the right time? The answer 
is, "it depends." In ASU's data warehouse, we enter data 
yearly, by census date, monthly, bi-weekly, weekly, and 
daily. By rule, the more often you update a table in the data 
warehouse, the more operational in nature it is. For example, 
ASU's data warehouse extracts daily address changes on 
students. Many warehouse users create labels for student 
mailings and need current address information. Updates to 
code tables occur daily too. However, we try to limit the 
number of data elements loaded on a daily basis, since there 
is a cost associated with loading the warehouse. [Authors' 
note: In the future, daily updates to ASU's data warehouse 
will "replicate" data in operational systems. Replication is 
a popular industry solution of copying data and placing it 
locally for processing, which appears to users as direct 
access to data.]

     Integration

Integration is the most important characteristic of a data 
warehouse, and the characteristic lacking in most operational 
systems. Integration gives a data warehouse credibility, 
consistency and real power. When designing these capabilities 
into ASU's data warehouse, the team recognized data in need 
of integration and data that integrates (see Figure 5). Data 
in need of integration in ASU's data warehouse include fields 
like ethnicity, gender, and name. A major integration problem 
at ASU exists with the department code structure. There are 
three or four recognized sets of department codes in the 
various operational systems. Because of the number of 
department codes in use, we plan to rectify the problem on 
the operational side first with a single code before adding 
the department code to the warehouse.


Data in Need of Integration

  *  Name
  *  Ethnicity
  *  Marital Status
  *  Organizational Unit

Data That Integrates

  *  Fiscal Year, Semester
  *  Account
  *  Unique Identification ID
  *  Organizational Unit

Figure 5. Integration examples.


Integration also requires data that integrates. This is the 
data that spans the high level subject areas of the data 
warehouse. At ASU, these high level subject areas are 
students, financial information, human resources, and courses 
(see ASU data warehouse high-level design in Appendix A). 
Examples of data that integrate or crosswalk the high level 
subjects are fiscal year, semester or term, department, 
course, a person's unique identifying ID, and account number. 
Data elements that integrate are the very fabric of an 
operational system. If these elements differ in format or 
domain between systems, integrating the data in the warehouse 
is difficult or impossible. [Domain is the set of allowable 
values that a data field can legitimately take, i.e., 
permitted values, range of numbers, allowable dates.] When 
data successfully spans high level subject areas, consider 
the data warehouse completed and "self-actualized."

     Officialness

Making official numbers available in a data warehouse brings 
credence and appeases the user getting different numbers with 
every query. We add official "numbers" to the warehouse to 
limit how much our users must understand the impact of timing 
on data. To achieve officialness, institution's select census 
or "cut-off" dates for measuring data. For example, at ASU, 
there is the "21st day" (of the semester) census for student 
enrollment; in the financial system, fiscal year end; in 
human resources, September 30. With these census dates, there 
is a distinct period of measurement, making historical trends 
much easier to compare and allowing integration across 
systems. For some requests, official numbers are better to 
use (i.e., historical trends), while at other times the most 
current data is best (i.e., financial decisions). At ASU, 
both numbers are available on the data warehouse. To simplify 
user queries, official and current values appear in separate 
databases (see high-level design at Appendix A).

     Security and Privacy

Security and safeguarding privacy are major concerns in a 
data warehouse. Security in a database means protecting data 
against unauthorized disclosure, alteration, or destruction. 
Granting SELECT (authorization to read only) access to tables 
(or views) achieves security in a warehouse. Although many 
RDBMSs support column level security, ASU has not implemented 
this feature, primarily due to the high cost of administering 
user access. In traditional operating systems, tasks or 
screens control access. This usually results in access to a 
single record or instance of data (i.e., verifying admission 
status of a student, etc.). However, in a data warehouse, 
employees have access to a table or all tables in a subject 
area, which means access goes beyond retrieving individual 
records to retrieving groups of records.

At ASU, read-only access to the data warehouse is at the 
database level, which means access to a group of tables. This 
procedure follows an open access policy for employees 
approved in 1993. For example, the Office of the Registrar is 
the trustee of the STUDENT database, the Human Resources 
director trustee of the HUMAN RESOURCES database, etc. In 
these databases, read-only access excludes access to name and 
address. To obtain name and address information, our data 
trustees grant access to the PERSON database. The user's 
business need determines access to the PERSON database. 
Additionally, training classes emphasize the Buckley 
amendment and Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA). Also, users receive training on the appropriate use 
of warehouse data.

     Results

The diagram in Appendix A shows ASU's high-level warehouse 
design in the context of databases. [Database is a collection 
of tables or files and is loosely equivalent to a subject 
area.] The STUDENT, FINANCIAL, HUMAN RESOURCES, and COURSE 
databases comprise the foundation of the warehouse. These 
databases contain the "granular" or detail data and updates 
occur on a weekly, bi-weekly or monthly basis, depending on 
the database (i.e., STUDENT = weekly, COURSE = weekly, HUMAN 
RESOURCE = biweekly, FINANCIAL = monthly, etc.).

Name and address exist in the PERSON database. This database 
integrates with other databases through a unique identifying 
ID. Updates to PERSON occur on a daily basis. Individuals 
creating class lists or labels are the primary users of this 
database. Although warehouse "purists" may scoff at the idea 
of daily updates (i.e., reproducing the operational 
environment), creating labels is a legitimate business need 
at ASU. For an employee to get access to name and address, 
they need permission from the trustee (the Registrar for 
student information and the Human Resources director in the 
case of employees). We protect names and addresses for 
security and privacy reasons in PERSON, but the utility of 
the warehouse for planning and decision making through the 
other databases is unaffected. The LOOKUP database contains 
all lookup tables for the entire warehouse, and is updated 
daily.

The OFFICIAL database contains census values for frequently 
used data. Instead of hundreds of tables as in the STUDENT 
database, the OFFICIAL database only contains dozens of 
tables. The OFFICIAL database helps users understand the 
concept of officialness and the smaller size makes a good 
starting point for new warehouse users. The OFFICIAL database 
is actually a collection of views into the larger, granular 
databases, such as STUDENT. Besides being easier to use, the 
OFFICIAL database achieves a summarized flavor, which less 
sophisticated users can comfortably use. In the OFFICIAL 
database, properly constructed queries result in answers that 
match the official reports released by the Department of 
Institutional Research.


Ten Lessons Learned

During ASU's data warehouse development, we learned many 
valuable lessons (see Figure 6). Most of these lessons are 
general in nature, in that any institution starting to build 
a data warehouse can learn from them. A few lessons are 
particular to ASU, given our setting and how we decided to 
use the warehouse. The most significant decision was to make 
a management decision making resource like the data 
warehouse. Most system developments at ASU support the needs 
of the operational user, failing to provide management the 
information they need for decision making. In designing ASU's 
data warehouse, we decided to focus our resources in 
addressing the needs of this important. but previously, 
ignored group of users.


Ten Lessons Learned

1. New technologies have shortcomings.
2. Costs are shifting to the customer.
3. Security and privacy are major issues.
4. Warehouse impacts dataadministration.
5. Training pays dividends.
6. Support structure needs to be in place.
7. Invest in a warehouse dictionary.
8. Officialness is hard to achieve.
9. Educate on warehouse concepts often.
10. Avoid cost justification if possible.

Figure 6. Lessons Learned


     Technology Shortcomings

Client/server technology is still less reliable, secure, and 
timely than its predecessor. UNIX servers are not as reliable 
as mainframes and data access tools are just reaching 
adolescence. Networks add new layers of complexity and 
monitoring performance and tuning of servers is imperfect. 
The results are gaps in available technology and software 
leaving users' needs unmet. One such example is matching a 
cohort on a desktop machine with the data warehouse. Most 
query and retrieval tools do not support this type of 
function (local table join with server table). If the tool 
allows this function, joining data is slow, making the match 
process prohibitive for large databases. Allowing users to 
create tables containing the IDs of records being tracked on 
the server solves this problem. However, this solution 
defeats benefits of client/server technology, moving emphasis 
back to the host machine. The result is user frustration with 
the warehouse, when the problem is the technology. Also, with 
new technology, there is always new vocabulary to learn, 
adding further to the problem: client/server, relational 
databases, middleware, join, UNIX, decision support, SQL, 
TCP/IP, Ethernet, Cartesian joins, data administration, E/R 
models, ODBC, DAL, etc.

     Customer Costs

Information technology departments and technology infusion 
funding traditionally absorb much of the cost of computing at 
ASU. With the warehouse and client/server computing, the cost 
of upgrading hardware and buying software for enterprise 
systems shifts to the individual or department. Employees 
seeking access to the warehouse need to know the cost of 
connecting. At ASU, a "connection checklist" is available, 
detailing all the steps necessary for access. The checklist 
includes information on these items: data access approval, PC 
or Macintosh, printer, Ethernet connection, communications 
software, data access software, software installation, and 
training. The checklist informs potential users about exactly 
what they need, how to get what they need, and how much it 
costs. We find this checklist to be a very helpful document 
(see Appendix B).

     Security and Privacy

Client/server technology will ultimately force society to 
redefine privacy and organizations to rethink security. A 
data warehouse brings security to the forefront of this 
discussion, slowing development and frustrating users. 
Unfortunately, security and privacy issues may stall or limit 
development of a data warehouse at many institutions. Even 
though a data warehouse does not involve update capability, 
the ability to extract and convert groups of records to 
usable information is threatening. As a result, one of ASU's 
early initiatives was to develop a new data access policy 
that recognizes the value of placing data in the hands of our 
customers. There will be problems, but training and 
accountability are the most appropriate ways of dealing with 
this issue at the present time. At ASU, there is only one 
case in which we revoked warehouse access due to misuse.

     Data Administration

Data administration at ASU has followed the evolution of data 
administration according to Bill Inmon. Inmon says the data 
administrator's role has changed dramatically from managing 
the data dictionary to designing and constructing a data 
warehouse.[8] ASU's data warehouse put the Office of Data 
Administration on the map and brings a new awareness of 
enterprise data. Users do not believe how bad their data is 
until they see it. For example, one college uses the data 
warehouse to verify professional program information and 
correct mistakes on ASU's operational systems. However, the 
data warehouse is a double-edged sword for Data 
Administration. Once users start using the warehouse, a 
"never-ending" list of enhancements quickly appeared, 
inundating Data Administration. Institutions need to identify 
permanent resources for warehouse development and support, or 
other data administration activities begin to suffer.

     Training: A Good Investment

The need to train data warehouse users is critical and pays 
good dividends. In most computing projects, management 
recognizes the need for training, but does not always fund 
training. The is true of ASU's data warehouse. With every new 
database there is a need for another training course, 
complete with reference materials. Every enhancement or 
change to the warehouse must be documented and communicated 
to warehouse users. Data Administration assumed 
responsibility for training and documentation at ASU. While 
training adds to the critical mass of warehouse development 
and helps our users, it distracts from development.

Initial training at ASU focuses on the tool, the logic, and 
the data. While a data warehouse supports hundreds of 
different access tools, training with one tool reduces a 
trainee's learning curve. After an extensive review of data 
access tools, Brio Technologies' DataPrism (an access tool 
that works in both the Macintosh and Windows environment) is 
our access tool of choice. Logic training is important also 
(i.e., SQL operators, Cartesian join, etc.). While this 
functionality is inherent in most access tools, training on 
query logic avoids many questions down the road. Lastly, 
training centers on the data. Data is what users know the 
least. We spend up to 60% of class time training on data, and 
hope to increase this percentage as users become more 
familiar with access tools and query logic.

     User Support

While training reduces the number of data warehouse 
questions, a support infrastructure handles other support 
needs. At ASU, there is an e-mail address (wareq@asu.edu) 
where users can send their questions or problems. Experts on 
warehouse data, networking, and data access tools receive 
these messages and respond within 24 hours. We log responses 
in a searchable database. Also, users can telephone a central 
help line that will send an e-mail message for them. Second, 
there is a file transfer protocol (FTP) site available for 
warehouse users. This site stores postscript copies of all 
documents associated with the data warehouse and copies of 
the data models. This is also a site for sharing common 
queries built by users or the warehouse team. Lastly, there 
is a Warehouse Users Group (WUG). WUG meets monthly to share 
findings. educate members about the data warehouse, and 
provide feedback to the warehouse team (currently there are 
over 75 WUG members). WUG also gives warehouse users an 
opportunity to find a "warehouse buddy," so they don't feel 
alone in ASU's world of data.

     Invest in a Warehouse Dictionary

One of the more daunting tasks is to provide users a good 
data dictionary and source for metadata. [Metadata is data 
about the data, including layout, format, encoding/decoding 
algorithms, domain constraints, etc.] The problem is that 
there are thousands of data elements, and populating 
definitions and metadata is an endless task. Although this 
process is time consuming, the dividends paid are 
significant. At ASU, we draw resources from the BAIG to 
populate definitions (see page 4 for explanation of BAIG). 
[Authors' note: One of the reasons we recommend users adopt 
DataPrism as their access tool is the "remarks" feature. This 
feature functions like a pop-up data dictionary, allowing 
users to quickly determine the definition and code values of 
a data element or table in the warehouse.]

     Officialness

Providing "official numbers" in the data warehouse greatly 
improves warehouse credibility. However, delivering 
"officialness" is not as easy as it sounds. The programs that 
extract and transform the data from the legacy databases must 
produce numbers that balance with the official numbers 
released by ASU. Since different algorithms and extract 
programs exist, there are often differences between the 
warehouse and official university reports. The problem 
multiplies because of ten years of data in the warehouse. 
Creating and validating ten years of official data is 
difficult. Going forward in time when building a warehouse is 
easier than attempting to reconstruct and validate history.

     Data Warehouse vs. Administrative Systems

Many users tend to look at the data warehouse as another 
administrative system. This phenomenon happens since the data 
warehouse is in relational format. While the

warehouse can makeup some of the data shortfalls operational 
user's experience ("data gaps"), it is not the warehouse's 
primary role. To help our users understand the difference 
between the data warehouse and their administrative system, 
we developed Figure 7. This figure compares a data warehouse 
to an administrative operational system on a variety of 
dimensions. Every talk or presentation on the data warehouse 
includes this slide underscoring the differences between the 
two. We reiterated these differences frequently, or our users 
begin to make unreasonable requests of the warehouse.


(Figure 7 not available in ASCII text version)


     Cost Justification

If possible, avoid the traditional cost/benefit analysis in 
justifying a data warehouse. Since a data warehouse benefits 
the entire organization, ascertaining the benefits from 
improved decision making is difficult. Fortunately, at ASU, a 
limited demonstration of the warehouse concept was enough to 
sell the project. If a more complete cost/benefit analysis 
were required, the project may never have started. In other 
words, don't spend too much time justifying a warehouse, just 
start building one! [Authors' note: A data warehouse may be 
inevitable, since there is little chance that a technical 
breakthrough will occur, making access of legacy data easier 
or cheaper than a data warehouse. The Gartner Group says 
"Organizations employing a data warehouse architecture will 
reduce user-driven access to operational data stores by 75%, 
enhance overall data availability, increase effectiveness and 
timeliness of business decisions, and decrease resources 
required by IS to build and maintain reports."[9] ]


Conclusion

The future of ASU's data warehouse is just beginning to take 
shape. Initially, the warehouse served as a resource for 
accessing information from legacy systems. Now, the warehouse 
fills a vital role in a client/server environment as a 
telescope into ASU's distributed data stores. Some of this 
data will reside in the data warehouse, while other elements 
will be "viewed" from the RDBMSs where the data resides. We 
foresee a time when the telescope extends beyond ASU to other 
institutions with common goals, such as the Maricopa County 
Community College District. The real power of the warehouse 
will be actualized in years to come.

The data warehouse also fills an important data 
administration role in a client/server environment. As 
distributed application developers move further away from the 
central computing core, the data elements in the warehouse 
insure the Integrity of the institution's enterprise data. 
The definitions and coding standards in the warehouse are 
what distributed developers follow. The warehouse is the 
"glue" holding enterprise data stores together until a mature 
repository comes along.

The most important contribution of ASU's data warehouse is 
the new focus on data integration. While attempting to 
achieve integration in the warehouse, ASU conceived a new 
data model which not only integrates the warehouse, but our 
administrative operational systems as well. By integrating 
the warehouse, we obtain more powerful data. By integrating 
our operational systems, we provide strategic new levels of 
customer service.

The bottom line is that warehousing is here to stay. Data 
warehousing can give institutions the opportunity to "get 
their feet wet" in client/server technology, distributed 
solutions and RDBMS. This is essential for any future 
mission-critical application. A data warehouse is a low risk, 
high return investment. The question for corporations and 
higher education is not simply whether to build a warehouse, 
but when. Based on predictions by Peter Kastner, an analyst 
at the Aberdeen Group in Boston, "All companies will build [a 
data warehouse] in the next five years."[10]


(Appendix A not available in ASCII text version)


(Appendix B not available in ASCII text version)


  *  Introduction

This checklist is designed to assist you in determining if 
you have everything necessary to access the ASU Data 
Warehouse. Some of the information included in this checklist 
is, by necessity, of a technical nature. We encourage you to 
call your local or distributed consultant or 965-CNCS if you 
have any questions related to this document.

The Warehouse requires a number of components that are 
described in detail in this document. The checklist includes 
the following items which must be considered when connecting 
to the ASU Data Warehouse:

  *  Data Access Approval
  *  PC or Macintosh
  *  Printer
  *  Ethernet Connection
  *  Communications Software
  *  Data Access Software
  *  Software Installation
  *  Training


After reading this document, please complete one of the 
attached worksheets for a PC or Macintosh. This will assist 
you in estimating the costs associated with connecting to the 
Warehouse. Please keep in mind that the prices listed in this 
document are estimates only and should be verified based on 
current pricing structures.


  *  Data Access Approval

To obtain read-only access to the ASU Data Warehouse, you 
need to do the following three steps:

1. Complete the attached Request for Access to Computing 
Facilities form, omitting your signature in the "Owner 
Signature" section. A sample form is attached as a guide to 
completing the request. You will sign the form in training 
class after the instructor explains security issues.

For student data:
Graduate students requiring access to the Warehouse as part 
of their ASU employment will require signature from their 
department sponsor.

Undergraduate or graduate students not employed by ASU will
not be given access to the Warehouse.

2. Obtain supervisor's signature in Sponsor Signature block.

3. Forward the form to the Registrar's Office (Student Data 
Trustee) for approval (mail stop 0312, SSV B121).

Your userid and password will be established and issued to 
you by the following process:

Data Trustee will approve the level of access and forward the 
approved form to the Data Administration Training Instructor.

Data Administration Training Instructor will forward the form 
along with forms for other students registered for a specific 
class date to the Computer Accounts Office.

Computer Accounts Office will create your userid and 
password, and then forward the form back to the Data 
Administration Training Instructor.

To activate your userid for use with the ASU Data Warehouse, 
you will need to attend an introductory training class 
(Accessing ASU Data Warehouse) to become familiar with the 
Warehouse. Please refer to the section below for training 
information.

Data Administration Training Instructor will explain security 
issues in class and obtain your signature on the Request for 
Access to Computing Facilities form. The instructor will then 
give you a copy of the form and forward a copy to the 
Computer Accounts Office.


  *  PC or Macintosh

A PC or Macintosh is required to access ASU's Data Warehouse. 
Both minimum and recommended configurations for PCs and 
Macintosh computers are listed here for your reference. These 
configurations are appropriate for compliance with the ASU 
Rational Information Technology Environment (ASURITE).


(Configuration Chart not available in ASCII text format)


*  Printer


With access to the Warehouse, you are most likely going to be 
interested in printing your reports and diagrams of the 
Warehouse databases. In order to accomplish this, you will 
need access to a laser printer. If you are presently 
connected to a local area network, such as a Banyan, Novell 
or AppleTalk network, there may already be a laser printer 
that exists in your office area that can be used for 
warehouse printing. If you are not connected directly to a 
local area network and do not have a printer, we suggest that 
you consider purchasing a laser printer. In order to print 
the diagrams, you need a printer that can print postscript 
files.


Ethernet Connection

An Ethernet connection is a requirement for accessing the ASU 
Data Warehouse. Ethernet allows you to connect to other 
computers and printers on campus and provides high speed 
communications. Ethernet has become a standard for new data 
communication connections on campus and is rapidly becoming 
wide spread throughout all university departments. If you 
already have an Ethernet connection, you may proceed to the 
next step. If you have a connection such as dial-in, Kermit, 
Forte, Irma or LocalTalk, you will need to obtain an Ethernet 
connection in order to access the Warehouse.

To obtain an Ethernet connection, you will need to do the 
following:

1. Obtain a copy of the Application for Data Network 
Connection. This form is available from COMPASS at Computing 
Commons, 2nd Floor or by calling 965-5939.

2. Complete the form. There may be questions on the form 
which you cannot answer. The Data Communications department, 
at 965-5911, will assist you in completing the portions of 
the form that are not clear. Also, they will provide current 
up-to-date pricing, so that you may complete the necessary 
PO9 for payment.

NOTE: Page 2 of the Application for Data Network Connection 
will ask if you need an Ethernet interface card. If you 
presently do not have an Ethernet card, we recommend that you 
request services of the Tech Shop to provide and install the 
card. When you contact Data Communications, specify that you 
will need an Ethernet card so that you can complete one PO9 
for the connection, card and installation .

NOTE: Page 2 of the form also asks questions pertaining to 
the installation of the NCSA/Telnet software. When completing 
this form, please indicate that you will not be using the 
NCSA/Telnet software. If you are using a PC, you will need 
the LAN Workplace software which is described in further 
detail in the Communications Software portion of this 
checklist. If you are using a Mac, you will be using MacTCP, 
which is available through COMPASS.

3. Submit the completed form to Data Communications with a 
printed screen from the CUFS system showing that you have 
obtained Level 1 approval for the PO9.

4. A representative from Data Communications will make the 
necessary arrangements for the Ethernet connection and 
installation of an Ethernet card, as specified in your 
application.

  *  Communications Software

In addition to the Ethernet connection described above, 
communications software is required for your computer. There 
is a minimum of two communication programs required for using 
the ASU Data Warehouse:

1. TCP/IP (also known as Telnet) software is required for you 
to use your Ethernet connection.

If you are using a Macintosh, this software is included with 
System 7 and is called MacTCP. If you do not already have a 
copy of MacTCP, you may obtain this software through COMPASS, 
at the Computing Commons.

If you are using a PC, we recommend use of the ASUNET program 
for your TCP/IP software. ASUNET is available through Compass 
in the Computing Commons, 2nd Floor. If you are currently 
using ASUNET, you will need to obtain the upgrade to a 
version dated February,1994 or more recent. This up-to-date 
version contains a program called WINSOCK which is required 
for accessing the Warehouse.

Alternatively, you may use FTP PC/TCP or Novell LAN Workplace 
on your PC as the TCP/IP package of choice.

2. A program known as Sybase Open Client, Net-Library is also 
required to access the Warehouse. This program is available 
through COMPASS for the PC and Macintosh environments. Be 
sure that your Ethernet connection is installed and working 
prior to attempting to install this software.

3. Another program, Sybase Open Client, DB-Library may also 
be required depending on the nature of the data access 
software that you are using. This Sybase Open Client, DB-
Library software is only applicable to PC users and is not 
required for the Macintosh. This software is required if you 
choose DataPrism for the PC, but is not required for the 
Macintosh version of DataPrism. If you select some other 
product for data access, such as SAS/Access, Microsoft 
Access, Q+E, Forest and Trees or PowerBuilder, you will need 
to consult with the vendor to determine if the Open Client 
DB-Library software is required to run their application 
program. If the Open Client DB-Library software is required 
by the vendor, you may purchase this software at COMPASS.

  *  Data Access Software

Several data access software products have been researched by 
the staff involved in setting up the ASU Data Warehouse. 
While we have found many to work very well in providing 
access to the Sybase server supporting the ASU Data 
Warehouse, DataPrism is the recommended tool. The features of 
DataPrism are summarized as follows:

  *  Easy to learn, requiring minimal training to get started
  *  Useful for generating simple ad hoc queries and reports
     that may be viewed or printed
  *  Useful for exporting data to other applications, such as
     Word, WordPerfect or Excel
  *  Rapid report generation and execution
  *  Supported for the Data Warehouse environment

DataPrism is available through COMPASS, at the Computing 
Commons. Special pricing has been negotiated for this 
product. Please refer to the attached worksheets for pricing 
information.

NOTE: There are numerous products available through software 
vendors that will allow you to access the Data Warehouse. 
Each of these products offer advantages and characteristics 
that differentiate them from each other. Several of the 
products we evaluated for use with the Data Warehouse have 
problems which effect the usefulness of the product. If you 
are considering using a tool other than DataPrism, please 
contact a consultant by calling 965-CNCS or by sending an 
electronic mail note to WARE-Q to inquire about the product 
that you are interested in.


  *  Software Installation

The communications and data access software described in this 
document is complex and involves configuration options. While 
there are instructions included with the purchase of these 
software packages, we encourage you to contract with 
Facilities Management to perform the installation and 
configuration of this software. There is a charge of $40 per 
hour for this service. Depending on the complexity of your 
configuration and the components required to be installed and 
configured, this may take from 1 - 4 hours for a Facilities 
Management technician. To arrange for this service, contact 
Facilities Management at 965-2826.


  *  Training

After you have all of the pieces in place (data access, PC or 
Mac, printer, Ethernet connection, communications software, 
and data access software) ready to be trained. Refer to ASU 
Data Warehouse Training sheet available in COMPASS, Computing 
Commons 202 on Main campus, or by contacting the IRT Helpline 
at 543-4357 on West campus.


(Chart not available in ASCII text version)


Footnotes:

[1]Inmon, W. H. (1992). [Conversation with paper's author.] 

[2]Inmon, W. H. (1992). What is a data warehouse? (Tech Topic 
Vol. 1., No. 1) Prism Solutions, Inc.

[3]White, C. (1994, December). Client/server obsession. 
Database Programming and Design: Special Supplement, 7. 

[4]Hammer, K. (1994, September-October). Will the data 
warehouse be warehoused? Relational Database Journal, 32. 

[5]Cafasso, R. (1994, October 10). Praxis forges data 
warehouse plan. Computer World, 32.

[6]Inmon, W. H. (1992, April). Building the data bridge: The 
ten critical success factors of building a data warehouse. 
Database Programming & Design, 69. 

[7]Date, C. J. [Discussion on database design.]

[8]Inmon, W. H. (1992, January). Winds of change: A brief 
history of data administration's amazing growth and 
development. Database Programming and Design, 68-69.

[9]Gartner Group (1994). [Proceedings from Conference 
Presentation on Data Warehouse.]


[10]Brandel, M. (1994, October 31). AT&T GIS dives into 
vertical markets. Computer World, 4.


Authors' Note

John Porter, Data Administrator and Director of Institutional 
Analysis
Arizona State University
Office of Institutional Analysis and Data
P.O. Box 871203
Tempe, AZ 85287-1203
(602) 965-5959
Internet: john.porter@ASU.EDU

John Rome, Data Analyst Principal
Arizona State University
Office of Institutional Analysis and Data
P.O. Box 871203
Tempe, AZ 85287-1203
(602) 965-5959
Internet: john.rome@ASU.EDU

