AberdeenGrou
p
Networking:
1998 
Practice 
Summary
May 1998
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
One Boston Place
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
USA
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
www.aberdeen.com
2
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Aberdeen Group is a Boston-based, computer and 
communications consulting and market-research 
organization.
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select group 
of domestic and international clients.    Each requires a 
combination of strategic advice and pragmatic, experience-
based action plans.    Assignments range from corporate and 
product positioning and organizational planning to in-depth 
market segment research.    Aberdeen consults on mergers and 
acquisitions, corporate positioning and investor relations, 
transaction-processing benchmarks, and has special expertise 
in software and midrange    computer markets.
In carrying out assignments, Aberdeen uses a proprietary, 
comprehensive, analytical framework providing fresh insight 
into the complex future of computing and communications, 
both from a technological and a market- dynamics 
perspective.    Aberdeen also offers retainer-fee programs to a 
group of continuing clients.
Aberdeen principals and staff are recognized industry figures 
with hundreds of years of combined high-tech industry, 
research and financial community experience among them.    
They are quoted extensively in industry trade and business 
publications.    Each is a frequent conference and seminar 
speaker.
In addition to client-related research and consulting, 
Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, Aberdeen Viewpoints 
and Profiles, which summarize its analysis and research 
findings.
Information contained in this publication has been obtained from sources 
we believe to be reliable, but is not warranted by us.    Opinions reflect 
judgment at the time and are subject to change without notice.
The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations mentioned 
in this publication are the property of their respective holders.
3
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Warning:    This publication is protected by United States copyright law and 
international treaties.    Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this 
publication are copyrighted by Aberdeen Group, Inc., and may not be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by 
any means without prior written consent.    Unauthorized reproduction or 
distribution of this publication, or any portion of it, may result in severe 
civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the maximum extent 
necessary to protect the rights of the publisher. 
© 1998 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
4
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABERDEEN’S NETWORKING PRACTICE 
V
Description, Focus and Benefits
v
Today’s Strategic Market Questions
vi
About Aberdeen’s Networking and Telecommunications Practice
vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1
KEY ABERDEEN FINDINGS
3
Market Dynamics
3
Technology
3
Business Realities — Suppliers
4
Business Realities — Users
4
NETWORKING DEFINED
5
How Networking Fits into Aberdeen's Networking and Telecommunications Practice 5
Networking Market Dynamics, Size and Segmentation
6
Market Descriptions and Dynamics
7
Core Network Components
9
Hubs and Bridges
9
Routers
11
Switches
12
High-Speed Networking Technologies
12
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
15
Impact of Major Industry Trends
15
Supplier Success Factors
17
User Success Factors
18
5
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
SUPPLIER ABSTRACTS
20
3Com Corporation
21
Bay Networks, Inc.
21
Cabletron Systems, Inc.
23
Cisco Systems, Inc.
24
Compaq Computer Corporation
25
Hewlett-Packard Company
26
International Business Machines Corporation.
27
Intel Corporation
28
Lucent Technologies
29
FORE Systems
30
Xylan
31
Alteon Networks
32
Extreme Networks
32
Foundry Networks
33
Torrent Networking Technologies
34
6
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Preface
Aberdeen’s Networking Practice 
Description, Focus and Benefits
Aberdeen Group's Networking Practice follows the technological 
developments and market trends affecting networks of all sizes — 
from the hybrid enterprise to small to medium-sized businesses and 
to the small and home office.
Networks are expected to function as an essential piece of today's 
business strategies.    The original technologies and architectures 
upon which they were built have reached their limits and can no 
longer support ever-increasing and more unpredictable traffic.    The 
past year has been one of considerable evolution from older to 
newer technologies.    Aberdeen has closely monitored this transition 
in order to help users make sound decisions regarding their 
networks.    The hot topics for 1998 as we see them are:

Developments in Multi-layer Switching 

High Speed Routing 

Next Generation Ethernet and Token Ring Solutions 

How VLANs Fit in Today's Networking Strategies 

ATM — Is It Dead or Alive? 

Transitioning Networks for IP Optimization 

The Role of Fibre Channel in the Network 

Managing Bandwidth as a Resource 

The Increasing Importance Role of Remote Access to 
Businesses 
Network technology is moving extremely rapidly, with major 
developments occurring every 18-24 months (witness the recent 
introduction of Gigabit Ethernet right on the heels of Fast Ethernet). 
Network managers need to understand the full ramifications of their 
decisions.    This includes architectural trade-offs, price performance 
curves, feature sets, obsolescence trends and how all will impact 
their current networking topology. Using Aberdeen Group’s insight, a 
network manager can help protect investment while providing users 
the latest in technological capabilities.
7
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Today’s Strategic Market Questions
1. What are multi-layer switches? How do they differ from 
routers? How will they impact current hub/router-based 
LANs? How do the approaches networking suppliers differ? 
How will multi-layer switches affect implementation and long 
term growth? 
2. What are the migration strategies for moving from hub/router-
based LANs to LAN switch-based networks? 
3. Who are the major players in Gigabit Ethernet switching? 
What are the pros and cons of deploying Gigabit Ethernet vs. 
ATM? 
4. What are VLANs and how can they be deployed. What are the 
ramifications of deploying VLANs. How will LAN switches 
prepare networks for future VLANs? 
5. What role does Fibre Channel Play in today's networks? 
6. What tools will enable a network manager to implement Class 
of Service (CoS), Quality of Service (Qos), and policy based 
routing, on both the LAN and end to end service over the 
WAN? 
7. How can remote access extend the business reach? 
About Aberdeen’s Networking and Telecommunications Practice
Aberdeen’s Networking and Telecommunications practice closely 
tracks technology developments in enterprise and service provider 
networks.    We research and analyze market and technology trends 
and their business impact to organizations of all types and sizes — 
from small-to-medium-sized businesses to telecommunications 
service providers.
Networks are no longer distinct, discrete entities; they have become 
strategic business tools.    Consequently, new applications and 
technologies are adding intelligence to existing networks in order to 
address more demanding user and provider needs.    These shifts 
present great opportunity and even greater challenges —for 
businesses, IT decision-makers and service providers alike.
As telecommunications services evolve, enterprises are able to 
deploy more advanced, economical networks.    For example, this has 
been the impetus behind the budding migration from costly private 
line networks to cost-effective Virtual Private Networks based on 
public network services such as X.25, Frame Relay and ATM.    As 
these services proliferate, smaller businesses can benefit from the 
8
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
network connectivity and capabilities once available solely to large 
enterprises.
Aberdeen recognizes the importance of networks and 
telecommunications services from two perspectives:

How enterprises build networks to enable business 
applications; and 

How telecommunications service providers architect, 
deploy and profit from their service offerings. 

Using these perspectives, Aberdeen's Networking and 
Telecommunications addresses: 

Networking Technologies and Architectures 

Remote Access 

Network Integration and Outsourcing 

Networking Supplier Channels 

Common Carrier Services 

Internet Service Providers 

Internet Telephony 
Aberdeen concentrates on how technology can help businesses — be 
they users or providers of networking and telecommunications 
services.    We help Information Technology professionals understand 
the benefits new technologies and services provide, as well as the 
challenges they pose.    We work with technology and services 
suppliers to gain a better grasp of user requirements and more 
effectively position the benefits of their solutions. Aberdeen offers 
published research (in hard copy or electronic format), subscription 
services, customized projects and consultative services on a project-
by-project or on-going basis. 
9
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Chapter One
Executive Summary
This report serves as an introduction to Aberdeen's Networking 
Practice.    Its objective is to provide the reader with a high-level 
overview of the technical developments, transitions, market trends 
and challenges affecting information technology networks.    This 
practice focuses on network architectures and protocols, the 
hardware and software components used to build and improve 
networks, and the developments in other IT areas that impact 
network performance and design. 
The Internet has changed everything, including the role of the 
network, which is no longer just "plumbing."    It has become the 
underlying girder of a business's ability to compete successfully.    
Consequently, network managers, IT executives and business 
decision-makers all need to keep abreast of rapidly evolving 
networking technologies.    This is necessary in order to understand 
how best to optimize network performance and to support 
demanding, business-critical applications in an environment of 
unpredictable, ever-increasing traffic patterns. 
In this overview, we identify the major factors that are impacting 
networks today.    The key market dynamic shift Aberdeen has 
observed is that business solutions now drive the IT decision-making 
process. 
With the adoption of intranets and extranets, most networks have 
outgrown the capabilities of the technologies upon which they were 
originally built.    As a result, network managers face a migration to 
next-generation technologies.    In theory, this has been made easier 
because certain ground rules have finally been agreed upon.    
Internet protocol (IP) has become the dominant network protocol, 
and Ethernet the prevalent medium.    But network managers still 
have to contend with the legacy components of their networks as 
they move forward.    Furthermore, next-generation networking 
technology choices, both for the local area network and wide area 
access, are far more complex and confusing than they were a few 
years ago.    Some technologies, such as Gigabit Ethernet and xDSL, 
are too new to have a well-established track record that can be used 
for evaluation purposes. 
1
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Today's applications continue to consume bandwidth at an awesome 
rate.    It has become evident that continually upgrading network 
bandwidth is not the wisest approach, especially in light of shrinking 
IT budgets.    Both network managers and suppliers have come to the 
realization that bandwidth is not, in effect, unlimited and free, but is 
a resource that requires conservation efforts.    Control and 
prioritization need to be imposed on applications, bandwidth and 
users.    As a result, network resource conservation is emerging as an 
overall theme. 
To aid in these conservation efforts, suppliers are adding intelligence 
in the form of software components to their hardware solutions 
throughout the network.    Software will, in fact, play an increasingly 
important role in networking, especially as the information housed 
in directories such as NDS and Active Directory are leveraged to gain 
more granular intelligence regarding applications.
Businesses have discovered the advantage of providing all users with 
timely access to business information in order to increase 
productivity and make the business process more competitive.    
Access to the networks and the Internet anytime, from anywhere is 
now a requirement, not a luxury.    As a result, remote access to 
corporate data has become increasingly important.    Businesses and 
service providers can now create Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) 
using tunneling and security protocols that turn the public Internet 
into an as-needed private network for a fraction of the costs of 
running a private wide area network.
Wireless networking solutions still occupy a niche in the networking 
market, but the ratification of the 802.11 standard has helped move 
wireless technology forward, making it more interoperable and less 
expensive.    The bandwidth of wireless is still much lower than that 
of current wired technologies but is approaching the 10Mbps speed, 
making it more suitable for a wider range of applications.    Certain 
vertical markets such as healthcare, retail and education are 
adopting wireless solutions because of the mobility they provide.
The Internet has made information access democratic.    It puts the 
power of enterprise connectivity into the hands of small businesses 
as well as the Fortune 500.    For that reason, and because enterprise 
networks are often made up of smaller components, Aberdeen 
covers networks of all sizes — from the hybrid enterprise, to small to 
medium-sized businesses and to the small office/home office. 
Aberdeen recommends our in depth report, Keeping In Step with 
Advances in Networking - Third Edition, as a guide that can help IS 
and IT decision-makers navigate safely through the current 
2
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
networking technology churn.    Aberdeen's services include a series 
of reports on current technology issues as well as comprehensive 
analysis of key issues on a broad range of information technology 
topics and vertical markets. 
3
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Chapter Two
Key Aberdeen Findings
Market Dynamics
·
Demand (especially from new web based applications) is 
outstripping network capacity, requiring network managers to 
deploy major upgrades and additions to the network 
infrastructure.
·
Because applications and business solutions now drive 
network buying decisions, line of business managers have 
joined in the purchase decision-making process.
·
Network managers now focus on complete solutions, not just 
point products.
·
The criticality of timely access to information and the need for 
flexible working environments has spurred demand for 
remote access.
·
Converged networks (voice, video and data) will not become 
widespread for another several years.    This is due mainly to 
the inconsistent quality of connections and the uncertainty 
about the benefits of carrying data, voice, and video on the 
same network.
·
Recent financial results from the past two quarters indicate a 
softening of the networking market.    Overall revenue growth 
in traditional segments can be expected not to exceed 15% 
because of the fast decline of prices and the fact that other 
issues such as the Year 2000 problem require significant IT 
resources.    Green field opportunities for internetworking 
suppliers exist primarily in the service provider and small 
office/home office market.
·
The slowdown in growth in Asia will be offset to a great extent 
by an acceleration of networking technology adoption in 
Europe.    This growth is being spurred on by the adoption of 
intranets, the increasing popularity of the Internet, and the 
deregulation of the telecommunications industry across 
Europe.
Technology
4
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
·
Product life cycles are growing shorter, and older technologies 
are being displaced at a faster rate.
·
Performance requirements have spawned next-generation, 
high-speed networking technologies such as Gigabit Ethernet, 
High-speed Token Ring and switched Fibre Channel.
·
More intelligence is being distributed throughout the network, 
which will enable higher reliability, more control, and simpler 
administration of the network.
·
The standards for key technologies such as Gigabit Ethernet, 
and IP based services like Quality of Service (QoS) and Policy 
Based Management are still maturing. 
Business Realities — Suppliers
·
Routing switches (also referred to as Layer 3 switches) are 
replacing routers in the network, which has created challenges 
for router suppliers and opportunities for startups.
·
Niche startups, followed by the merger/acquisitions of 
successful startups, continue to play an important role in the 
supplier community as key drivers of technological 
innovation.
·
Certain segments of the networking equipment market, such 
as 10 and 10/100 network interface cards (NICs) and hubs, 
have experienced free-fall price drops.    Suppliers must adjust 
to the realities of lower margins.
·
Uncertainty is running rampant in the networking channels as 
margins erode and the adoption of an electronic commerce 
model by networking suppliers becomes a reality.    Indirect 
channels fear they may be bypassed in the selling process.    
Consequently, they are searching for new ways to add value 
for the customer.
Business Realities — Users
·
Network managers cannot keep up with the dizzying pace of 
innovation the industry has experienced in the past year.    
Many have just completed significant improvements to their 
networks and do not have the financial resources to undertake 
another upgrade, despite the fact they need additional 
bandwidth. 
·
IT expertise is in short supply, making it increasingly difficult 
and costly for corporations to attract and retain quality, expert 
IT employees. 
5
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
·
As network complexity increases, more IT organizations are 
considering outsourcing network services, particularly remote 
access.
6
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Chapter Three
Networking Defined
Aberdeen defines networking as those technologies, devices and 
services used to transmit data from one user to another across the 
business enterprise.    The network begins at the PC or server 
network interface card (NIC), the point where data exits the desktop 
or portable computing device, and encompasses the various 
segments of the local area network:    the devices housed in wiring 
closets that connect the workgroups; the network backbone and its 
internetworking equipment that connects all the wiring closets to the 
network data center core; and the devices and remote access 
equipment that link local-area networks and remote users across the 
wide area network. 
How Networking Fits into Aberdeen's Networking and 
Telecommunications Practice
Aberdeen's Networking and Telecommunications Practice closely 
tracks technology developments in enterprise and service provider 
networks.    We research and analyze market and technology trends 
and their business impact upon organizations of all types and sizes 
— from small-to-medium sized businesses to major 
telecommunications service providers.    Aberdeen recognizes the 
importance of networks and telecommunications services from two 
perspectives:
8. How enterprises and businesses build networks to enable 
business applications;
9. How telecommunications service providers architect, 
deploy and profit from their service offerings. 
Using these perspectives, Aberdeen's Networking and 
Telecommunications Practice addresses:
10.
Networking Technologies and Architectures
11.
Remote Access
12.
Networking Supplier Channels
7
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
13.
Network Integration and Outsourcing
14.
Common Carrier Services
15.
Internet Service Providers
16.
Internet Telephony (Voice over IP)
Aberdeen’s Networking Practice also works closely with other 
Aberdeen disciplines, especially the Network Services and 
Systems and Infrastructure groups to provide a well-rounded 
overall view of current issues facing desktop, LAN and network 
infrastructure managers, what the available solutions are, and 
what trends will impact networks in the future.
Networking Market Dynamics, Size and Segmentation
The networking market is currently sized to be in excess of $24 
billion, and is the fastest growing segment of the information 
technology industry.    As the networking market has matured, the 
means of segmenting it has changed.    Because of the pervasiveness 
of networks and the proliferation of network devices, segmentation 
by product is no longer adequate to fully describe the market.    In 
addition to the traditional division by product, market watchers and 
suppliers also segment this market by customer characteristics.
Figure 1:    Aberdeen's Networking and Telecommunications 
Practice
8
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Source: AberdeenGroup, April 1998
9
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
The networking market can be divided into five primary customer 
segments: 
17.The Large Enterprise Market, which consists of Fortune 1000-
sized companies.    This was the first group to require networking 
technologies and continues to be a mainstay of suppliers today.
18.The Small to Medium-sized Enterprise market segment, which 
includes companies that range from 50 employees up to Fortune 
1000 sized.    This is the fastest growing market, and the most 
difficult for suppliers to reach.
19.The Small Office/Home Office (SOHO), which makes up 90% of 
businesses worldwide.    SOHOs usually have 10 or fewer users (in 
Europe, 5 is the sweet spot; Asia-Pacific is mixed).    This category 
of user has little, if any IT support, so solutions need to be 
extremely easy to install and manage.    Reliability and 
interoperability are key to solution success in this market.
20.The Service Providers, including Internet Service Providers (ISPs), 
Local Exchange Carriers (LECs), Co-located Exchange Carriers 
(CLECs), Interexchange Carriers (IXCs).    The growth of Internet 
adoption has produced a new group of network equipment 
purchasers.    The Service Providers are both users of networking 
products and a channel that supplies certain types of equipment 
to the user.
21.The Consumer market.    This market represents the last 
networking frontier.    As the number of computing devices, 
peripherals and access lines increase in the home, the need for 
home networks is becoming evident.    This is a nascent market 
that is centered on personal rather than business needs.    With 
the advent of electronic commerce, this segment will increase in 
importance.
Figure 2 illustrates current networking market segmentation.    
Aberdeen's networking practice concentrates on the Large 
Enterprise, SME and SOHO markets.
Market Descriptions and Dynamics
Large Enterprise Networks
Large Enterprise networks have typically evolved from the data 
center out to the department and workgroup.    They represent a 
large systems connectivity perspective to networking.    In many large 
corporations, however, there has also been simultaneous growth in 
networking from the workgroup in.    In other words, there has been 
10
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
rapid growth in connecting PCs to local area networks in order to 
create effective workgroup computing environments.    A major 
challenge faced by Large Enterprise IS departments has been 
integrating these two converging network initiatives into a seamless 
whole.    Major catalysts for integration include decision support, 
new client server applications and the adoption of intranet/extranet-
based applications.    There is a major shift occurring in these 
networks to a controlled decentralized model, with fewer, but larger, 
servers, higher bandwidth requirements, more switching and 
centralized resource management.
The Small to Medium-Sized Enterprise (SME)
The second major segment of the networking market is the Small-to-
Medium-sized Enterprise (SME), one of the fastest growing market 
segments.    SME Networks have grown from the workgroup, 
constructed department by department, from the bottom up.    
Decisions about networking are often made collaboratively, but they 
are still driven by the business benefits incurred by adopting a 
specific application or technology.    Choices tend to be conservative 
and less cutting-edge.    The size of the networks vary; they usually 
consist of less than 1,000 users and represent the level of market 
segmentation below the Fortune 1000 companies.
The Small Office/Home Office
The SOHO market is the fastest growing segment of the networking 
market, and the least technically adept.    These users have become 
more quality conscious and better educated about the value of 
combining business
Figure 2: 1998 Networking Market Segmentation
11
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Source: AberdeenGroup, April 1998
applications and technology.    The major opportunity for suppliers in 
this arena centers on connecting the SOHO users to the Internet, 
which will serve as their wide area network.    Approximately 40% of 
SOHOs use the Internet as part of their business today.    Service 
providers, who also view this market segment as attractive, are being 
courted by equipment suppliers as a new indirect channel.
Consumer Market 
The consumer market is the last untapped reservoir of networking 
potential.    There are approximately 45 million U.S. households with 
home computers, and this market is growing roughly 10% per year.    
Approximately one fourth of these households own more than one 
PC.    As the number of users in the home increases, so does the need 
for a network that lets one Internet access account serve the entire 
household, rather than having separate accounts for each family 
member.    Furthermore, the variety of access options, including cable 
modems, has created new market opportunities.    This market is 
extremely price sensitive.    Performance is secondary, as a shared 10 
Mbps system should be sufficient capacity to handle nearly all needs 
in this setting.
Core Network Components
12
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
As the network has grown in size, traffic and number of applications 
supported, it has become increasingly complex, and includes a broad 
mixture of legacy and new technologies.    Networks are generally 
comprised of one or more local area networks (LANs) that are 
connected over a wiring system or by wireless connections.    Most 
enterprise networks must support several architectures, topologies 
and protocols, and multiple internal and access speeds.    Early 
networks such as SNA networks connecting IBM mainframes were 
generally proprietary and closed.    Recent installations include a 
combination of LAN segments based on open standards that 
interconnect an Ethernet, FDDI or ATM backbone.    LANs are often 
interconnected to remote locations via Frame Relay, private lines, or 
virtual private circuits to form a wide-area network (WAN).    Today's 
hybrid network is composed of many elements.    Figure 3 presents a 
typical heterogeneous network design.
Internetworking equipment is designed to identify the destination 
address of a data packet, route that information to the right network 
or network segment, translate the protocol, buffer the data, and 
perform other security and access functions.    The basic 
internetworking equipment is discussed below.
Hubs and Bridges
LAN devices are traditionally connected by a hub to form a LAN 
segment.    Cabling runs from the computing device or peripheral to 
the hub.    The hub either repeats or splits the signals sent through it. 
Because of their modularity, hubs are often referred to as the "Legos" 
of the networking arena.    Over time, they have developed more 
intelligence, and high-end    hubs can now support large central site 
facilities.    Their role has expanded from simple star-network 
connection to the focal point of interconnection for multiple LAN 
media, protocols and wide area (WAN) connectivity.    Stackable hubs 
provide a "grow-as-you-go" option that is especially attractive to cost-
conscious network managers, and switching hubs have added 
bridging and routing functionality. 
The price of workgroup switches has dropped considerably.    
Consequently, they have begun to replaced hubs.    We expect this 
trend to continue.    Hubs still have life as a low-end product for the 
SME and    SOHO markets.    Sales volumes may increase, though hub 
prices will continue to decline, approaching commodity status.
Bridges identify and re-broadcast messages that need to be directed 
to other LANs, usually using the same networking protocol.    They 
use software programs to filter, forward or broadcast (flood) an 
incoming data packet (or frame) based on its Media Access Control 
13
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
(MAC) address.    Today they are passé, as their functionality has been 
incorporated into routers and switches. 
Figure 3: Hybrid Enterprise Network: 
Source: AberdeenGroup, April 1998
14
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Routers
Until recently, routers have served as the building blocks for 
increasingly complex and critical network backbones.    Routers are 
Layer 3 network devices that have the intelligence needed to 
determine the optimal forwarding path for data packets (see OSI 
Reference Model, Figure 4, below).    Unlike bridges, which 
rebroadcast messages, routers are capable of directing network 
traffic to specific destinations.    They rely on the network layer 
information of the data packet and are fluent in the various network 
communication protocols.    Because the tasks they perform are 
complex, routers' performance tends to slow down as traffic 
increases. 
Token Ring networks have unique requirements that mandate a 
distinct type of internetworking device called the Source Routing 
Bridge (SRB).    Source routing falls somewhere between the general 
message broadcasting of Ethernet bridging and the protocol 
translation and destination mapping carried out by routers.
The router segment, once the high flyer of networking, grew less 
than the industry average in 1997.    Aberdeen expects router sales to 
the enterprise to continue to slow in 1998, as the majority of network 
managers opt for routing switches to replace or augment existing 
routers in the core of high performance local area networks.
Figure 4:    OSI Reference Model
15
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Source: AberdeenGroup, April 1998
16
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Switches
Network managers have found that the enormous increases in traffic 
— and especially the increase in Internet Protocol (IP) traffic over 
the past two years has created traffic bottlenecks at the router.    
Routers process packets at the network and transport layers (Layers 
3 and 4) of the OSI model.    Because routers are tasked with 
performing several complex functions, such as protocol translation, 
building routing tables, performing route lookups, and filtering 
broadcasts and multicasts, they tend to bog down when traffic is 
extremely heavy.    As a result, the need for switching has made itself 
felt at all levels of the network.
Switches are designed for speed.    They have traditionally performed 
the relatively simple function of forwarding packets, processing 
them at the data link layer (Layer 2) of the OSI model, forwarding 
packets across homogenous networks with the same Layer 2 
technology (e.g. Ethernet to Ethernet). 
The relative simplicity of switches has enabled suppliers to make 
fast, inexpensive devices by implementing most functions in 
hardware.    Routers, on the other hand are more intelligent and 
typically software-based, which makes them slower, more expensive 
and harder to maintain than switches.    In the past, switching and 
routing functions were separated, that is, located on different 
devices.    This architecture worked well until the recent surge in 
network and backbone traffic overloaded the routers.    Over the past 
eighteen months, Aberdeen has watched the rollout of routing 
switches, also referred to as Layer2/Layer 3 switches or multilayer 
switches.    These devices combine the intelligence of the router with 
the speed of switches, and are being installed in backbones to relieve 
traffic congestion. 
High-Speed Networking Technologies
Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet
Fast Ethernet (100 Mbps) has been adopted as the upgrade migration 
path of choice for Ethernet networks, especially as 10/100 Ethernet 
NIC prices have dropped to the levels of 10 Mbps Ethernet cards.    
The emergence of Gigabit Ethernet has provided an extremely 
attractive alternative to ATM in the enterprise network, and 
Aberdeen foresees an accelerating trend to adopt Gigabit Ethernet as 
the network backbone technology of choice for the majority of users 
who already have Ethernet backbones and who do not anticipate 
implementing voice or video on the network.
17
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) has been one of the most talked 
about networking technologies over the past few years.    Originally 
designed as a telecommunications standard, ATM is based on a cell 
architecture rather than the frame architecture of Ethernet and 
Token Ring, which are more limited, both in bandwidth and 
scalability.    ATM promised the best of all possible worlds — 
integrated LAN and WAN functions combining voice, video and data 
into a single, uniform protocol with unheralded scalability and 
simplified management and design.    ATM was envisioned as 
running all the way from the desktop of one network across the wide 
area to the desktop of another network. 
That was the dream.    The reality is that ATM has not been accepted 
in data networks as an end-to-end solution.    It has proved too costly 
and too complicated for implementation at the desktop level.    
However, it has found its place in networking.    ATM posted healthy 
growth in 1997, primarily as a WAN and LAN backbone technology. 
Fibre Channel
Originally designed as a means of interconnecting high-speed 
peripherals to a shared mass storage device, Fibre Channel has 
proved to be an effective network protocol.    Combining features of 
both point-to-point channel and address-based network connections, 
Fibre Channel is a high-speed channel that connects devices to a 
network fabric, or matrix, of connections.    The fabric can be simple 
or complex and consist of any combination of devices — 
mainframes, clustered servers, disk arrays, hubs and switches.    Each 
Fibre Channel port manages a simple point-to-point connection to 
the network fabric.
Fibre Channel delivers bandwidth from speeds of 133 megabytes per 
second to 1.062 gigabytes per second over a variety of cable types, 
providing computing devices with a throughput mechanism that 
more closely matches their processing power than Ethernet or even 
Fast Ethernet.    A ratified ANSI standard, it supports various network 
topologies such as point-to-point, switched fabric and arbitrated 
loop.    It also supports command sets from most other channel 
protocols, including Internet Protocol (IP), Small Computer System 
Interface (SCSI), and High Performance Parallel Interface (HIPPI). 
Supporting up to 16 million nodes on a single fabric, Fibre Channel 
possesses excellent scalability.    Its guaranteed delivery and data 
prioritization mechanisms ensure that performance will not be 
sacrificed as the number of devices in the fabric increases. 
18
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Access Technologies
The wide area connection has always been the bandwidth 
constriction point for networks.    We have finally arrived at the era 
of high-speed wide area access technologies.    Analog modems now 
offer speeds of 56Kbps (with bonding technologies adding an 
additional 56Kbps capability if users are willing to pay for a second 
telephone line).    The emergence of xDSL technologies that has 
occurred over the past six months brings even greater bandwidth 
capabilities — from the 128kbps of IDSL to the 7Mbps download 
speeds of ADSL.    Cable modems, while more appropriate for the 
residential user, will find business adopters and at this point offer 
the highest downstream speeds of any access technology — 30Mbps 
downstream.    ADSL and cable modems are asymmetrical 
technologies, which means that they deliver greater downstream 
capabilities than upstream.    Cable modems and xDSL technologies 
are not yet widely deployed and are not available in all geographic 
areas.
For users, this plethora of access technologies can be daunting.    The 
key is to determine which applications will run over the wide area 
and then select the best access technology for delivering those 
applications within the constraints of availability and price.
19
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Chapter Four
Issues and Challenges
Client-server systems are evolving to Web- and IP-based, application-
centric computing.    As a result, networks are being overwhelmed by 
increasing demand and the need to deliver high reliability, high 
performance, consistent latency and traffic prioritization.    These 
needs are being driven by several trends. 
·
Increasing processor power and storage capacity are enabling 
more powerful client-server applications and larger file sizes 
which need to be shared across the network.
·
Web enabled and browser based applications such as intranets 
and extranets are fueling a dramatic increase in traffic over 
the network.    The nature of this traffic is bursty and 
unpredictable, making the networks harder to manage.
·
The broad deployment of business critical applications such as 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Customer Interaction 
Software (such as customer service and billing), and 
administrative and office automation applications are driving 
the network to mission critical status.    These applications 
require low (and consistent) latency to work properly, and 
high reliability to ensure the proper operation of the 
enterprise.
Because the technologies and architectures upon which networks 
were originally built have, in many instances, reached their limits, 
information technology (IT) managers find it increasingly difficult to 
support demanding, business-critical applications and more 
unpredictable, ever-increasing traffic patterns.    Consequently, 
significant improvements to the network must be made.
Impact of Major Industry Trends
·
Network managers, overwhelmed by technological change and 
complexity, are looking for ways to simplify the installation, 
configuration management and maintenance of the network.    
Adding increased intelligence in the network (e.g., auto-
20
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
configuring and self-healing networks), and providing better 
integration of network management systems that will allow 
for directory services integration and policy based 
management will help accomplish this.
·
The impact of the Internet on networking has been 
monumental.    It offers network connections in ways that were 
unimaginable before 1995.    It is no understatement to say that 
the Internet has become the network of choice for linking 
information and users across separate organizations.    The 
adoption of Internet technology within and without the 
enterprise network has caused an inversion of traffic patterns 
from the comfortable 80/20 rule to a model where 80% of the 
network traffic crosses the backbone.    Traffic has increased 
voluminously and has become more unpredictable, with 
unplanned and uncontrollable traffic spikes.    Browsing and 
push applications such as PointCast have also added to the 
unplanned amount of traffic that comes into the corporate 
network.    The challenge moving forward will be to impose 
more control and predictability onto the network.
·
Network managers must accommodate legacy protocols and 
enable them to function effectively in an IP-dominant 
environment.    The move toward thin-client, network-centric 
applications will require more robust and reliable networks 
because they will re-arrange data flows and traffic patterns.    
This will become essential as more mission-critical 
applications adopt the network-centric architecture. 
·
The Year 2000 may prove to be the sleeping tiger in the 
network.    Because IT managers are focusing so intently on 
year 2000 compliance for applications, operating systems and 
computing devices, they may accidentally overlook Year 2000-
proofing the network.    Every network manager should assess 
his/her local area network to insure that the network is 
running a Year 2000-compliant version of the network 
operating system and that all hubs, routers, bridges, switches 
and other network components meet Year 2000 compliance 
requirements.    This is most critical in networks where 
components may be built on an off-the-shelf PC platform.    We 
anticipate that this problem will be more prevalent in small 
and medium sized companies who tend to upgrade hardware 
less frequently and who do not have abundant resources for 
Year 2000 fixes.    It is also critical not to overlook the wide area 
components of the network.
21
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
·
Efforts to fix Year 2000 problems in applications and 
computing hardware will continue to divert dollars which 
could be earmarked for network improvement.    Additional 
resources for Year 2000 network assessment and repair will 
need to be requested by network managers.
·
Systems integrators and networking value-added resellers 
(VARs) have an opportunity to increase their services and 
revenues by adding Year 2000 assessments to their repertoire. 
There is a caution here, however.    Because Year 2000 
problems can be complex and cunning, it is virtually 
impossible to promise a total inventory of all Year 2000 
problems.
·
Convergence of voice and data will place even more traffic on 
data networks.    This will add complexity both to the network 
and to its management, and drive more demand for 
guaranteed network performance levels.    In short, users will 
expect the same performance from their data networks that 
they get from the voice network today — 99.999%.    In order to 
achieve this kind of performance and reliability, traffic 
prioritization, bandwidth reservations/guarantees, and low 
and consistent latency must be assured.
·
Improvements in laser technology will continue to expand the 
bandwidth capabilities and distance of optical networking 
systems. Data-optimized network infrastructures will first be 
deployed in the wide area.    Dense wavelength division 
multiplexing (DWMD) will enable the transport of as much as 
one terabit (1,000 gigabits) of information on a single optical 
fiber.    Much work still needs to be done on key specifications 
and interoperability.    Optical internetworking has the 
potential to remove the wide area bottleneck by providing 
enormous capacity, which in turn will impact the enterprise 
network by stimulating demand for increased bandwidth and 
processing power there.
·
Some of the issues of wireless technology, namely speed and 
cost, have been addressed, but wireless technologies will 
continue to be deployed primarily in vertical markets such as 
healthcare, retail, warehousing and distribution, and 
manufacturing.    While prices for wireless solutions have 
dropped significantly they will continue to remain higher than 
their wired counterparts.    The small office and home markets 
offer growing opportunities for technologies such as infrared 
(IR) and radio frequency (RF).
22
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
·
Security will continue to be a major issue and a challenge, 
especially as the Internet becomes an integral part of the 
business communication process and virtual private networks 
become a more common means of wide area connection.
Supplier Success Factors
Suppliers will be impacted by several technology and market factors.
·
Advances in ASIC design enable more and more integration of 
network functions in silicon, which results in faster and 
cheaper hardware.    The move from traditional software 
routers to routing switches, for example provides users with 
approximately a tenfold increase in capacity at roughly one-
tenth the cost ( a price performance difference of 100 times).    
Suppliers, especially the leaders in older technologies, will 
need to keep up with rapidly moving technology 
advancements.    This can often best be achieved by acquiring 
nimble startups. 
·
IT decisions increasingly include line of business personnel 
who count on information technology to solve specific 
business issues.    Therefore, to be successful, suppliers must 
tailor their product messages to the business manager and CIO, 
and not just to the network manager.
·
Product life cycles have shortened to the point that any major 
delay in product shipment can result in a supplier missing an 
entire generation of product.
·
This increase in integration, lower prices and standardization 
on IP has also started to drive the networking industry 
towards commoditization.    Hubs and NICs are already 
commodities.    Switches are fast moving in this direction, and 
low end routers will not be far behind.    Therefore, suppliers 
will need to differentiate themselves on service, support, 
manageability, and ease of use rather than pricing.    This drive 
toward commoditization is evidenced by the fact that Intel and 
Compaq, both known for high volume and low cost 
manufacturing and distribution, have made successful 
networking debuts.
In short, in order to be successful, suppliers need to cover all the 
technology innovations or be left behind, provide standards based 
solutions (customers are avoiding proprietary networking protocols), 
differentiate themselves based on service, and move up the food 
23
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
chain to sell to the CIO and business managers as well as the network 
managers.
User Success Factors
The following are guidelines for users:
·
Allow business needs and issues to drive network 
implementation.    Focus on how the network infrastructure 
will help the business be more successful, such as increasing 
sales and market presence, improving customer service and 
time to market, and reducing costs. 
·
Stick to standards whenever possible.    Avoid proprietary 
protocols.
·
Look for support for the protocols and technologies that exist 
in your network.
·
Incorporate the value of service, support and ease of use into 
your business models.
·
Check on vendor claims by testing the equipment in your 
environment before committing to a large order.
·
Ensure that there is a migration or growth path to the 
technologies and services that you will need in the future.
·
Assess Year 2000 compliance by networking suppliers.
Finally, network managers have been guided for some time by four 
basic tenets:
·
Don't touch the desktop unless you absolutely have to;
·
Build on what you have;
·
Never walk away from a good buy; and
·
Don't take unnecessary risks.
We find these “Laws of the LAN” still hold true today.
24
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
 Chapter Five
Supplier Abstracts
This chapter profiles a sampling of key networking suppliers.    It 
includes internetworking behemoths as well as newcomers with 
single technology foci.    This is not meant to be an exhaustive list, but 
to give the reader a brief overview of suppliers in this marketplace 
who are followed by Aberdeen.    The following companies are 
profiled:
Major Internetworking Suppliers
·
3Com Corporation
·
Bay Networks
·
Cabletron Systems
·
Cisco Systems
Diversified Suppliers
·
Compaq Computer Corporation 
·
Hewlett-Packard Company
·
International Business Machines Corporation
·
Intel Corporation
·
Lucent Technologies
Specialized Networking Suppliers
·
Fore Systems 
·
Xylan
High-Speed Networking Newcomers
·
Alteon Networks 
·
Extreme Networks
·
Foundry Networks
·
Torrent Networking Technologies
25
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
3Com Corporation
5400 Bayfront Plaza
P.O. Box 58145
Santa Clara, CA 95052-8145
1-800-242-3Com
www.3Com.com
Market Position
3Com is a global internetworking giant, with over 100 million 
customers worldwide.    The company has, through development and 
acquisition, amassed a broad portfolio of local and wide area 
information access products and systems solutions.    While the 
company offers products in all four segments of the internetworking 
market, its strengths lie in the workgroup networking environment. 
The company holds 40% market share of the network interface card 
market and leads in sales of Ethernet managed hubs, Fast Ethernet 
workgroup hubs, and Ethernet workgroup switches.    3Com is also a 
leader in Gigabit Ethernet and large ATM networks.    
TranscendWare™ management software provides the management 
applications for 3Com's network solutions    3Com's focus is on 
Pervasive Networking, 3Com's description of the networks that will 
result from the convergence of voice and data networks. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Under Eric Benhamou's leadership, 3Com has firmly established 
itself as a top tier internetworking supplier and the dominant vendor 
at the edge of the network.    Its acquisition of U.S. Robotics in 1997 
brought the company to the same size as Cisco Systems and gave 
3Com much needed penetration into the ISP community.    The 
hidden gold in this acquisition is the Palm Pilot, which has the 
potential of becoming the mobile operating platform for many users. 
The company has had much to digest over the past year, but is 
successfully evolving from a point-products supplier to a full fledged 
systems company.    A master at volume manufacturing, 3Com is well 
equipped to compete in today's rapid-price-decline networking 
market.    But there are challenges.    Because of its greater 
penetration, the company has been more affected by difficulties in 
the Asian market place than have its major competitors, and it must 
take steps to shore up its Asian partners until they can regain their 
footing. 
26
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Bay Networks, Inc.
4401 Great America Parkway
Santa Clara, CA 95052-8185
408-988-2400
www.baynetworks.com
Market Position
Bay is the third largest internetworking supplier.    Over the past two 
years, Bay Networks has moved aggressively to improve its market 
and product positions.    In November 1996, Dave House, formerly of 
Intel, was appointed as Chairman, President and CEO.    House brings 
considerable strength in both products and business integration to 
the company, as well as some much-needed revitalization that has 
put Bay squarely back on the competitive track. 
The company is now organized itself into two divisions:
·
The Enterprise Business Unit (EBU) focuses on marketing 
system solutions to the Fortune 1000; and
·
The Internet/Telecom Business Unit (ITBU) concentrates on 
remote access and router technologies for the carriers and 
ISPs. 
Bay established itself as the market share leader in ATM LAN 
switching and fixed configuration Fast Ethernet port share in Q2 
1997.    The company is an industry leader in embedded RMON 
network management, and its Optivity solution is a leading network 
management application for both high-end and low-end element 
management software.
Bay is working from an IP-focused blueprint it refers to as Adaptive 
Networking.    Adaptive Networking is designed to deliver more value 
at the edge of both enterprise and service provider markets by 
making IP networks more scalable, faster, easier to manage and 
more secure.    The company's recently launched Access Cornerstone 
initiative is built on switching/routing, access, management and IP 
services such as Virtual Private Networks and directory and policy 
services. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Bay has made good solid strides under its new leadership team.    
Dave House has restructured management, refocused marketing, 
infused optimism into the employee base, and reassured both 
customers and channels.    The company has plugged holes in its 
product line though acquisition and partnerships.    Bay has good 
27
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
initial penetration in the service provider market and its remote 
access solutions are being enthusiastically received.      However, 
significant challenges remain as it pushes into new markets while 
protecting its core business.    While Bay pushes aggressively into the 
Internet/Telecom arena, it must assure its enterprise base, who may 
not be ready or willing to cede their networks to carriers and ISPs, 
that they are still a top priority.    This can be accomplished through a 
more coherent system sell rather than the point approach Bay has 
taken in the past.
Cabletron Systems, Inc.
35 Industrial Way
Rochester, NH 03867-0505
603-332-9400
www.ctron.com
Market Position
Founded in 1983 as a cabling company, Cabletron is a leader in high-
performance internetworking solutions.    The company is widely 
recognized for its outstanding SPECTRUM network management 
technology, quality engineering, and excellent service and support 
capability.    As the fourth member of the "four horsemen of 
networking," Cabletron competes head-to-head with Bay Networks, 
Cisco and 3Com. 
As part of a major effort to take the company to the next stage of 
business development, Cabletron has put in place a broad set of 
initiatives to lead the company into the emerging convergence 
market of voice, video and data and extend its customer base beyond 
the traditional Fortune 500 to the carrier and Internet Service 
Provider communities.    The company made two important 
acquisitions, the Digital Network Product Business, which provides 
instant indirect channel access, and Yago, a high-speed switching 
vendor that will strengthen Cabletron's high-end networking 
solutions portfolio.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Cabletron has made progress in focusing beyond pure technology 
and concentrating more on market realities and its channels 
strategy.    However, the company faces significant challenges as it 
moves to regain a stronger position in the networking market.    
28
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Disappointing second and third quarters in FY 1998, led to a 
dramatic drop in share price.    Top management shuffles and the 
return of founder Craig Benson have thrown into question the 
company's commitment to the new, expanded vision laid out in the 
strategic plan. 
On the plus side, access to Digital's reseller channels should help 
significantly in improving Cabletron's indirect channels sales.    
Furthermore, Digital has already broken selling ground in the 
service provider market, which will also help Cabletron.    The Yago 
switch router gives Cabletron an edge in this emerging market and 
should provide significant revenue opportunities if aggressively 
priced. 
Cisco Systems, Inc.
170 West Tasman Drive
San Jose, CA 95134
408-526-4000
www.cisco.com
Market Position
The undisputed leader in the Global 1000 enterprise, 
internetworking equipment market, Cisco holds either the number 
one or number two market share position in almost every market in 
which it competes.    Cisco's roots spread from its early days as a 
router vendor, and the company has built its business and its 
reputation by addressing issues of network complexity.    A major 
theme for Cisco has been to offer a wide range of scalable solutions 
that have the interoperability required in today’s heterogeneous 
networking environment.    Aberdeen has watched the company 
evolve from a hardware-centric supplier to an internetworking 
supplier with an intense software focus. 
The company offers the industry's broadest range of hardware 
products.    Its full end-to-end complement of routing and switching 
products are based on a common Cisco IOS software architecture 
that delivers consistent network services.    Cisco solutions 
incorporate Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, Token Ring, 
and ATM.    The company is involved in a major push into the 
29
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
converged voice/video/data market, concentrating a great deal of 
technology talent and resources on this market.    This has moved it 
from a position of competing with other internetworking suppliers 
to the carrier-supplier league of Nortel and Lucent.
Cisco sells to customers in three target markets: Enterprise, Service 
Providers and Small/Medium Business and executes both its direct 
and indirect channel sales and marketing programs with precision.    
Cisco has sold capably into enterprise accounts and has also taken 
full advantage of explosive demand driven by ISPs and WAN service 
providers who are rapidly adding capacity for the Internet.    The 
company has done a masterful job of adopting electronic commerce 
and today is the world's largest Internet commerce site, selling more 
than $10 million a day in products over the Web.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Cisco’s leadership is so solidly established that it is hard to imagine 
the company giving much overall ground.    A major challenge has 
been whether Cisco could survive the transition from routers to 
switches.    With the help of several acquisitions (Cisco averages 
fourteen per year), Cisco has established itself as a leader in 
switching as well as maintaining its impressive leadership position 
in the routing market.
Cisco has been accustomed to a business model in which margins 
have been comfortably high.    A major challenge for Cisco comes 
from a market in which prices free-fall overnight.    Can the company 
maintain its exceptional profitability in an environment of shrinking 
network margins?    The other major challenge will be how well Cisco 
can compete against the likes of Lucent and Nortel in the green field 
service provider market. 
Compaq Computer Corporation
Communications Products Group
8404 Esters Boulevard
Irving, TX 75063
1-800-345-1518
www.compaq.com
30
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Market Position
While poised to be the number two computer company in the world 
with its acquisition of Digital Equipment Corporation, Compaq 
Computer Corporation is a newcomer to the networking market.    
The company has targeted the SME and SOHO market.    Compaq's 
goal is to use networking as a means of offering a complete solution 
from the on or off-site desktop computer to the server at the 
corporate site, with a focus on ease of installation, use, and 
maintenance.
Compaq has gained some networking technologies — notably 
network interface cards and modem technology — from previous 
acquisitions.    The company has refreshed its hub line and added 
Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit switching and remote access to its 
repertoire, believing that the market is transitioning from a shared 
media model to one built on direct connection between desktop 
computers and switches. 
Conclusions
Compaq's plan to reach the $50 billion revenue mark by the year 
2000 is a very ambitious undertaking and will require the 
Communication Products Division to do its part by grabbing market 
share quickly.    Compaq's networking product line plays to its 
desktop and server strengths, but it must make the best use possible 
of its existing channels to pull networking solutions along with its 
computing hardware.    One advantage Compaq has is its ability to 
thrive on low margins.
Targeting 25% of the remote access server (RAS) market places 
Compaq against some fierce competition.    To succeed,    the company 
will have to compete successfully against incumbents Ascend, 3Com, 
and Lucent, as well as Cisco, Bay and Nortel — a formidable group. 
The big question is whether a major league computing supplier can 
become a commanding force in networking.    None of the top 
computing suppliers — Digital, Hewlett-Packard or IBM — has been 
able to accomplish that feat. 
Hewlett-Packard Company
Workgroup Networks Division
8000 Foothills Boulevard
Roseville, CA 95747-5551
1-800-752-0900
31
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
www.hp.com
Market Position
The second largest supplier of global information technology, 
Hewlett-Packard has established itself as a committed player in the 
networking industry.    HP's competitively priced, networking 
solutions are designed to meet the needs of networks that grow from 
the workgroup up.    Products include hubs, switches, adapters and 
Internet access devices.    They incorporate standards-based 
interoperability with reliability, flexibility, manageability and ease of 
installation.    HP has the advantage of being able to offer its clients a 
complete workgroup solution, including networking products, PCs, 
printers, servers, scanners and Open View network management.    
The company has forged a strategic alliance with Cisco Systems 
which includes joint development, sales and support of networking 
solutions.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Aberdeen research substantiates that, as far as end-users are 
concerned, HP "walks the talk" when it comes to their networking 
vision.    HP's solutions are particularly attractive to small to 
medium-sized organizations because of their emphasis on ease of 
use and reliability.    Beyond technology and hardware, Aberdeen has 
found that the single most important item to small to mid-sized 
business users is service and support, one of HP's greatest strengths.
HP's strategic relationship with Cisco brings significant benefits to 
each company.    HP gains a broader product line for its channels and 
access to networking solutions that can move to the enterprise, while 
Cisco gains additional worldwide sales and support capabilities.    
Both companies will reap the benefits of joint development.
International Business Machines Corporation.
Networking Hardware Division
eNetwork Software 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
1-800-IBM-3333
www.ibm.com
32
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Market Position
When service, support and the IBM Global Network are included, 
IBM is the world's largest internetworking systems provider, with 
over $9 billion in revenues.    The company has aligned all its 
divisions, including its networking hardware and software groups, to 
support the facilitation of electronic business (e-business).    IBM has 
recently reorganized the Networking Hardware Division in the 
hopes of positioning the division as a serious contender in the 
remote access, ISP and carrier markets.
Late to jump on the Ethernet and TCP/IP bandwagons, IBM now 
offers a complete line of campus and enterprise networking 
solutions.    Hardware offerings including bridges, concentrators, 
controllers, hubs, access devices and servers, LAN and Ethernet 
adapters, modems, routers and switches (Ethernet, Token Ring, ATM 
and Multiprotocol).    The company is heavily involved in the 
development of High-speed Token Ring and developing voice over IP 
solutions.    Software solutions include Internet-to-SNA connectivity, 
web-to-host and host integration, the Mobile Equilizerproduct, and 
security solutions.
Aberdeen Conclusions
IBM brings all the essential components to networking: the 
hardware, the software, the management tools, service and support. 
The company understands the importance of helping customers 
continue to build on their investment in the traditional IBM SNA 
networking framework.    Providing solutions that enable the 
integration of SNA with IP is an example of this approach. 
While IBM does a very credible job of supporting its existing 
customer base, the challenge lies in extending its reach to non-IBM-
centric networks.    The company recognizes that most networks 
today will be heterogeneous rather than homogeneous, a step long in 
coming.    It has moderated its zeal for ATM as the only migration 
path for upgrading and embraced Ethernet, Fast Ethernet and 
Gigabit Ethernet along with High-speed Token Ring.    This shift has 
led to an expanded product portfolio that can meet the needs of 
network managers who do not wish to move to ATM, giving IBM a 
more competitive position. 
33
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Intel Corporation
2200 Mission College Boulevard
Santa Clara, CA      95052
408-765-8080
www.intel.com 
Market Strategy and Position
A preeminent powerhouse of the information industry, Intel is best 
known for, and has the dominant market position in, 
microprocessors for PCs and servers.    The company's Network 
Products Division is now developing an Intel presence in the 
networking market.    Targeting consumers, SOHO (small office, home 
office), and branch offices of small to medium businesses, Intel offers 
a line of network interface cards, hubs, and switches.    The company 
is second only to 3Com in network interface card sales and has 
leveraged its strengths in volume manufacturing and distribution to 
gain market share.    To date, however, it has made fewer inroads into 
the hub and switch market.    Intel will continue use to its existing 
channels to sell its networking products. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Intel's stated goal in all it does is to increase the need for processing 
power, and that is its main motivation for entering the networking 
arena.    Its sheer size in the industry makes it a force with which 
established networking suppliers must contend, at least at the low 
end of the market.    It has provided 3Com with credible competition 
in the network interface card market, and has helped push 10/100 
pricing to new lows. 
Intel’s silicon expertise, brand equity, extensive resources, efficient 
manufacturing, and established distribution channels are all 
competitive advantages.    However, Intel will face some major 
challenges moving forward.    The company's late entry into the 
networking market is an impediment, especially when they face the 
entrenched networking suppliers.    Its recent move to extend and 
solidify its channel relationships by tying its various separate 
programs into one cohesive certification program should help 
overcome channel weaknesses and the perception that Intel is not a 
serious networking player. 
34
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Lucent Technologies 
600-700 Mountain Avenue
Murray Hill, NJ    07974
888-584-6366 
www.lucent.com
Market Position
Lucent is a leading telecommunications equipment supplier to the 
largest global telecommunications service providers.    Data 
networking currently accounts for approximately 40% of the 
company's $26.4 billion revenue. Lucent has recently committed $5 
billion to fund an aggressive strategy to enter the data networking 
arena.    Building on the strategic relationship it forged with Bay 
Networks, Lucent has acquired Agile Networks (LAN switching), 
Prominet Corporation (Gigabit Ethernet routing switches), and 
Livingston (remote access concentrators), as well as recently 
announcing its intention to acquire WAN ATM switching supplier 
Yurie for $1 billion.    Lucent will continue to build its Enterprise 
Data Networks group and solution set through acquisition. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Lucent has good potential to be an extremely significant player in 
the data networking industry.    It brings the resources, brand equity, 
account coverage/distribution network and management expertise to 
be a major contender.    Lucent's reputation and expertise will play 
well with ISPs and CLECs, a major customer segment.    Its Net Care 
management and support program will prove extremely attractive to 
enterprise users.
The downside risks for Lucent include the fact that it is not yet 
perceived as a major data networking company.    Its strength lies in 
selling to telecom managers, and network managers are often in 
different departments.    Furthermore, they may have no prior 
experience with Lucent.    Customers will need to see a long term 
commitment to the data networking business from Lucent before 
they are willing to change vendors.
FORE Systems
1000 FORE Drive
Warrendale, PA 15086
35
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
412-742-4444
www.fore.com
Market Position
A leading provider of ATM communications solutions to enterprises 
and service providers, FORE Systems holds the largest installed base 
of ATM LAN solutions today and plays an ongoing role in the 
definition of ATM standards.    Its fiscal 1998 revenues topped $495 
million.    The company has recently embarked on a corporate 
awareness campaign that is designed to attract the attention of 
business decision-makers as well as network managers.    The focus is 
on the increased capacity, scalability and flexibility provided by 
FORE's ATM "Networks of Steel." 
The company has established a very strong distribution channel to 
augment its direct sales.    It has strategic OEM partnerships with 
major suppliers such as Nortel and Cabletron, and service providers 
such as Sprint, GTE, Southwestern Bell, Bell Atlantic and Ameritech. 
FORE has collaborated with Hewlett-Packard to jointly develop ATM 
solutions that provide switched integration of ATM and Ethernet 
environments.    Additionally, FORE has signed strategic partnerships 
with PictureTel, a videoconferencing company, and Sphere 
Communications, a computer telephony integration firm.
Aberdeen Conclusions
FORE’s focus on ATM products is both its greatest strength and 
greatest weakness.    This singularity of focus has enabled FORE to 
lead in ATM LAN solutions.    However, it has proved a weakness 
because the company did not have a sufficiently broad product line 
that could compensate when slowdowns in the ATM market 
occurred. 
FORE's investment in marketing appears to be paying off.    The 
company experienced strong growth in its fourth quarter of FY 1998, 
with net profits up 238%.    The arrival of Gigabit Ethernet on the 
scene does, however, offer an alternative to ATM in the network 
backbone and may stall the adoption of ATM in Ethernet-based 
networks, negatively affecting FORE's ability to sustain its current 
growth rate.    What will help FORE is the increasing demand for 
networks that can deliver true quality of service — something that 
only ATM can currently provide. 
36
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Xylan
26707 West Agoura Road
Calabasas, CA 91302
818-880-3500
www.xylan.com
Market Strategy and Position
Xylan is a middle tier player in the networking industry with $211 
million in revenue.    A switching supplier, Xylan differentiates its 
routing switch solutions by their support for a large number of 
media types (interfaces) including: Ethernet, ATM, Token Ring FDDI, 
Frame Relay, ISDN and voice circuits.    Xylan has also has built 
intelligence for quality of service and policy based management into 
its solutions.    This flexibility lets Xylan switches integrate with an 
extremely broad range of legacy networks.
Xylan has over 700,000 switch ports installed worldwide and serves 
large corporations, universities, government and 
telecommunications service providers.    The company gaining 
market share and last year was the fastest growing publicly-held 
networking company, growing 64% to the rest of the industry's 10%. 
Xylan has a well developed channel program, and has relationships 
with IBM, Alcatel, Anixter, Checkpoint, LSI Logic, Sun Microsystems, 
and Unisys.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Xylan is one of the dark horses of the industry and has the potential 
to become a major switching supplier.    The company is growing 
faster than the industry average, and has reliable product and a good 
reputation for service.    However, it faces many challenges as it 
competes with both the established players, who have large installed 
bases and extensive account coverage, and the aggressive startups, 
whose solutions are loaded with features at very competitive prices. 
Xylan must continue to provide quality and service, and aggressive 
price performance.    Xylan’s biggest challenge is winning better 
market visibility and mind share.
37
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Alteon Networks
6531 San Ignacio Avenue
San Jose, CA 95119
408-360-5500
www.alteon.com
Market Position
Founded in1996, Alteon focuses on applying high speed (100 Mbps 
and Gigabit) Ethernet technology to maximize server performance 
by offloading network traffic processing from servers, returning 
cycles to the server for other applications.    Its solutions include 
Gigabit Ethernet adapters, server switches, and load balancing 
software.    Alteon’s solutions are powerful and will “bind” up to 
400,000 sessions per second to a server — which is about 500 times 
the capacity of server based products.    Alteon further differentiates 
its products by supporting jumbo frames for higher throughput and 
redirecting traffic to a local cache when appropriate.
The company has received a total of $22 million in two rounds of 
venture financing.    It has approximately 75 end user customers, 
most of whom are ISPs.    Alteon also has OEM relationships with Sun 
Microsystems, NEC, and    Silicon Graphics, as well as reseller 
agreements in Europe, and Asia.    The company is currently shipping 
product, and has shipped 7,500 Gigabit Ethernet ports to date. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Aberdeen believes that Alteon has put together a combination that 
has a good chance of succeeding.    It has identified a definite market 
need: extending the life of servers.    Alteon’s solution is quite 
powerful, and will “bind” up to 400,000 sessions per second to a 
server — which is about 500 times the capacity of server based 
products.    The company    has done a credible job in developing its 
channel alliances.      Alteon’s downside risks are that its solution 
requires Alteon NICs in order to work, it balances traffic based only 
on the number of TCP sessions and not more sophisticated measures, 
and it faces stiff competition from companies such as IBM, Cisco, 
Foundry, and Bright Tiger.
38
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Extreme Networks
10460 Bandley Drive
Cupertino, CA 95014
408-342-0999
www.extremenetworks.com
Market Strategy and Position
Extreme Networks, a Gigabit Ethernet startup, was founded in 1996, 
and sells a line of Gigabit switches called “Summit”.    The Summit 
switches have a rich set of features including:    non blocking switch 
fabric that can switch about 10 million packets per second, Layer 3 
switching capability, quality of service support, and server load 
balancing (on recent releases).    The company is targeting high-end 
enterprise backbones and web hosting servers for their solutions as 
well as service providers who require access routers.    Extreme has 
developed a global distribution network, with 16 channel partners 
across Europe and Asia - Pacific.    The company also is developing an 
OEM channel.    Compaq has recently announced that it will OEM 
Extreme’s Summit 4 switch. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Extreme is worth watching.    It was one of the earlier companies to 
bring a Gigabit switch to market.    Its price/performance is 
aggressive.    In addition, its OEM relationship with Compaq could 
provide it with the distribution muscle that it lacks and enable it to 
reach a critical mass.    However, Extreme also faces an increasingly 
crowded field of and established players such as Bay, 3Com, 
Cabletron and Cisco.    These incumbents will be difficult to displace 
in the enterprise market. 
Foundry Networks
680 West Maude Avenue, Suite 3
Sunnyvale, CA    94086
408-731-3800
www.foundrynet.com
Market Strategy and Position
Foundry is a leader in the Gigabit Ethernet market.    It was founded 
in 1996, and shipped its first Gigabit Ethernet product in Q3 1997.    
Its solutions range from Layer 2 workgroup switches to high-end 
routing switches that run at speeds from 10 million to 50 million 
39
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
packets per second. Its solutions provide many features, including 
quality of service, load balancing, and policy based management.    
Foundry is targeting workgoups, campus backbones, enterprise 
backbones, and ISPs access points.
The company made its initial market penetration in Japan, where it 
continues to gain market share. New products are launched in Japan 
before the U.S.    The company uses a direct sales force and focuses 
on Global 1000 enterprises and ISPs, as well as several key vertical 
industries, and now has 120 accounts worldwide.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Foundry has proved that it can develop and ship leading edge 
products in very short time windows.    It has the following positives: 
a feature-rich product that delivers two orders of magnitude 
increase in price/performance over software routers, a mature 
product line now in its second generation and a growing installed 
base.    However, the competition is heating up rapidly, and Foundry 
must now compete with the major suppliers, all of whom have or 
will soon ship competing solutions, as well as other multilayer 
switching start-ups.    Large, established    suppliers will compete on 
service and reliability; the startups on features, price-performance 
and time to market. 
Torrent Networking Technologies
2221 Broadbirch Drive, Suite A
Silver Spring, MD 20904
301-625-1600
www.torrentnet.com
Market Position
Torrent is a high speed routing switch company that was founded in 
1996.    The company began shipping product in April 1998.    It is one 
of the few startups that will have shipped a product before going into 
its second round of funding.    Torrent’s IP9000 switching router has 
20 million packet per second throughput, delivering full routing 
functions at wire speed.    Its architecture includes Internet class 
routing tables and "per flow queuing" that provides quality of 
service guarantees for individual flows.    Torrent's strategy is to 
provide ISPs with carrier class performance at affordable prices — 
targeting Internet aggregation points (local access routers), and web 
hosting servers.    It is also targeting high end enterprise 
40
Networking Practice Summary 
Aberdeen Group 
Intranet/Extranet backbones that have similar load characteristics to 
an ISP point of presence.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Torrent has a developed a contending product, and is targeting a 
specific and substantive market opportunity.    It has built a high 
performance product at competitive prices — offering a 10x 
difference in price/performance over the traditional software router. 
In addition, Torrent is not challenging Cisco head-on, but is going 
after the part of the market where Cisco’s product line is not 
particularly price/performance- competitive.    The company has 
already built a sales pipeline and has pre-sold several of its products 
to ISPs, with whom it has an excellent audience because of 
congestion problems on their networks.    However, Torrent is not the 
first to market with a Gigabit scaled routing switch.    Its products do 
not have a long track record, and it faces fierce competition from 
Cisco, who will use its market presence to protect its customer base. 
41
