Mr. Peter Blackmore
Executive Vice President, Sales and Services
Compaq Computer Corporation
P.O. Box 69200
Houston, Texas 77269-2000

Dear Peter:

When we met in May in Cambridge at the Compaq analyst’s day, our discussion was about effectively communicating with Compaq’s large and small customers.   Obviously, there have been enormous changes for your company since our meeting.  Nevertheless, many of the topics we covered are still extremely relevant.

First, I wanted you to know that I hope you have tremendous success in your new area of responsibility, which as I understand it, is the infrastructure division of the combined Compaq and HP.  Second, I wanted to say that, given the events of this week, we walk a fine line between trying to support companies who need to get business done (in order to keep our economy on an even keel) versus being sensitive to the overwhelming sense of grief and a loss of innocence.   I hope you will feel that by contacting you now we have not been too aggressive.

As a follow-up to our meeting and the merger announcement, I have attached a collection of seven position papers Aberdeen has completed since the proposed HP-Compaq merger was announced.  We believe these represent a comprehensive review of the major integration challenge points and business opportunities for the two companies.  We are sharing them for your consideration as you build your new, planning agenda.  We will publish them on our web site next week.

These materials also represent the foundation of the type of field sales preparation and education program that we discussed with you.  Now more than ever, the field organization needs a clear message, with room for iterative updates, in order to effectively serve customers and prospects.  This needs to happen during today’s pre-merger stage as well as post-merger completion.

Aberdeen still hopes to support you and your colleague s with project work in these two areas over the coming weeks.


I will follow up with Kay Hart in the near future to see how we might proceed.  In the meantime, if you would like to discuss any  of the day’s current issues, I thoroughly enjoyed our lunch conversation, and would be happy to do so, in person or by phone.

Sincerely,




Peter Kastner
Chief Research Officer


cc   Kay Hart, AJ Dennis
       
	 