URL: http://www.computerworld.com/hardwaretopics/hardware/story/0,10801,88765,00.html

Transmeta unveils smaller microprocessors 

 Home News Blogs Reviews White Papers Newsletters IT Careers 

 News 

 Blogs 

 IT Blogwatch 

 Shark Tank 

 Topics 

 Business Intelligence 

 Careers 

 Development 

 E-Business & Web 2.0 

 Emerging Technology 

 Government & Regulation 

 Hardware 

 Internet 

 IT Management 

 Mobile & Wireless 

 Networking 

 Security 

 Servers & Data Center 

 SOA & Web Services 

 Software 

 Storage 

 Shark Bait 

 Back In The Day 

 Boss Ahoy! 

 Floundering Users 

 Miscellaneous Bait 

 News Bait 

 Office Politics 

 Q&A 

 Sinking Projects 

 Tricks Of The Trade 

 Video 

 Suggest a Topic 

 Submit a Bait 

 Register 

 Login 

 FAQ 

 Top Baits & Big Fish 

 Invite a Friend 

 SharkTank 

 Knowledge Centers 

 Operating Systems 

 Windows 

 Linux & Unix 

 Macintosh OS 

 Networking & Internet 

 LAN/WAN 

 Hardware & Devices 

 Protocols & Standards 

 Wireless Networking 

 Network Security 

 VPN 

 VoIP 

 Internet 

 Internet Business 

 Internet Applications 

 Web 2.0 

 SaaS 

 Broadband 

 Mobile & Wireless 

 Mobile Devices 

 Laptops 

 Mobile Access 

 Mobile Applications & RFID 

 Wireless Networking 

 Wireless Trends & Technologies 

 Personal Technology 

 Security 

 Cybercrime & Hacking 

 Spam, Malware & Vulnerabilities 

 Security Hardware & Software 

 Standards & Legal Issues 

 Privacy 

 Intellectual Property & DRM 

 Disaster Recovery 

 Storage 

 SAN 

 NAS 

 Hardware 

 Software 

 Disaster Recovery 

 Compliance 

 Storage Security 

 Business Intelligence 

 Analytics 

 Data Mining 

 Data Warehousing 

 Databases 

 Servers & Data Center 

 Servers 

 NOSes & Server Software 

 Virtualization 

 Data Center 

 Infrastructure Management 

 Grid & Utility Computing 

 Mainframes & Supercomputers 

 Disaster Recovery 

 Hardware 

 Processors 

 Windows & Linux PCs 

 Macintoshes 

 Laptops 

 Servers 

 Grid & Utility Computing 

 Mainframes & Supercomputers 

 Software 

 Desktop Applications 

 Enterprise Applications 

 CRM 

 ERP/Supply Chain 

 Open Source 

 Saas 

 Databases 

 Development 

 Web Services 

 Web Site Management 

 Software Development 

 Careers 

 Education/Training 

 Hiring/Recruiting 

 Skills 

 Search Job Listings 

 Outsourcing 

 Management 

 ROI 

 Project Management 

 Outsourcing 

 Government 

 Compliance 

 Legislation/Regulation 

 IT in Government 

 Opinion 

 Columnists 

 SharkTank 

 Webcasts 

 Video 

 Podcasts 

 White Papers 

 Computerworld Reports 

 Zones 

 Application Grid 

 Mobile Security 

 Mobility 

 Software 

 Virtualization 

 Case Study Library 

 RSS Feeds 

 Events 

 Face to Face 

 Leadership 

 Awards 

 Storage 

 Mobile 

 Data Center 

 BI 

 SaaS 

 Green IT 

 Honors 

 Sponsorship 

 Virtual 

 IT Innovations Forum - May 2009 

 Virtualization Directions - April 2009 

 Enterprise Architecture - March 2009 

Industry

 Automotive 

 Defense/Aerospace 

 Energy/Utilities 

 Financial 

 Health Care 

 Retail 

 Transportation 

 Travel 

 Manufacturing 

 Small Enterprise 

 This Week in Print 

 Print Subscriptions 

resource center

 IBM Servers for SMBs 
Call Today & Ask About Our Wide Range of Powerful IBM Servers for Your SMB.

 MSIT From Florida Tech - Online 
Earn Your Master's Degree From an Accredited University - 100% ONLINE!

 Free Forrester Risk Management Report 
Demystifying Enterprise Risk Management. Download Free With Registration.

 Download Microsoft Visual Studio ® Team System 
Streamline Dev processes, Reduce time to market. Try Microsoft Visual Studio Team System, FREE!

 HP Promotions & Rebates for Desktops 
New SYNNEX exclusive discounts on select HP desktop parts.

 See your link here 

 Subscribe to our e-mail newsletters 
For more info on a specific newsletter, click the title. Details will be displayed in a new window.

 Hardware 

 Computerworld Daily News (First Look and Wrap-Up) 

 Computerworld Blogs Newsletter 

 The Weekly Top 10 

 More E-Mail Newsletters  

Print edition

 Subscribe to Computerworld 
40 years of the most authoritative source of news and information for IT leaders.

Transmeta unveils smaller microprocessors

The new processors offer 1-GHz of x86-compatible performance

By Gillian Law

 January 5, 2004 12:00 PM ET 

Recommended

(0)

Digg

Twitter

Share/Email

 IDG News Service - 

 Transmeta Corp. today launched two new Crusoe processors aimed at mobile and embedded-computing product developers. 
 The Crusoe TM5700 and TM5900 microprocessors, half the size of previous versions, offer up to 1 GHz of clock speed and are available in a package that's 21mm by 21mm, Transmeta said. That's half the size of the TM5800 Crusoe notebook chip, although the new hardware retains the same low heat-dissipation characteristics that earlier chips had. 
 The company hopes the small size will be useful in set-top boxes, thin clients, blade servers, portable consumer products and other small, fanless products where size and heat issues are important. 
 Like earlier Crusoe processors, the new versions offer an integrated Northbridge, which communicates with the processor using the front-side bus and controls interaction with memory, the Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) bus, the Level 2 cache and the Accelerated Graphics Port. 
 The new processors offer 1 GHz of x86-compatible performance, equivalent to the fastest TM5800 version now available; integer and floating-point execution units; separate 64KB instruction and data caches; a 512KB (for the TM5900) or 256KB (for the TM5700) L2 write-back cache; a 64-bit double data rate synchronous dynamic RAM memory controller; and a 32-bit PCI controller, Transmeta said. 
 "Transmeta has run into customer concerns over performance with the TM5800, for example in Hewlett-Packard's TC100 tablet. Users expect more performance than Transmeta has been able to deliver," said Peter Kastner, executive vice president and chief research officer at Aberdeen Group Inc. in Boston. Kastner had not been briefed about the new, embedded version of the Crusoe processor but said the power of the processors to date has "not been good enough for many of today's applications." 
 A motherboard evaluation/reference platform based on the TM5900 processor will be available in the first quarter of the year, Transmeta said. It will include schematics, design guides, processor specifications and device drivers needed to evaluate product designs. 
 Santa Clara, Calif.-based Transmeta wasn't immediately available to comment on prices.

 Sign up for the Computerworld Daily newsletter. 

Reprinted with permission from

 --> IDG.net 
Story copyright 2009 International Data Group. All rights reserved.

 Recommend 

 Digg 
 Twitter 
 ShareThis 

 Email 
 Print 
 Send Feedback 

 Reprints 

Additional Resources

WEBINAR

 What Are 'Free' Remote Support Tools Really Costing You? 

In this webinar from LogMeIn, discover how "next generation"
remote support tools are optimized to provide advanced capabilities like
scripting, system diagnostics and smartphone support are empowering IT
technicians to solve more issues, more quickly, for more end users. Live
Broadcast June 11th, 2 PM ET. Register now! 

WHITE PAPER

 For Best Results, Think Beyond the Box 

Technology is complex. Keeping it running productively shouldn't 
be. To that end, you want to minimize the number of solutions needed 
in-house to simplify operations, maintenance, and support. Kodak offers a 
best-practices model. One company provides support for both scanner and 
software, for fast problem resolution without vendor finger-pointing. Download now! 

WHITE PAPER

 Accelerating the Path to Demand Intelligence with a Demand Signal Repository 

Utilizing demand intelligence improves the precision of pricing,
product assortments, channel/store placement, and promotion, which are all
essential for sustainable revenue management performance. Learn more,
 download this free whitepaper today. 

White Papers & Webcasts

 Hidden Cash: Maximizing the Value of Surplus Technology in a Down Economy 

 (Source: NHR) In today's tightened economy, all major technology purchases are being carefully scrutinized to ensure that each new piece of hardware and...

 5 Best Practice Tips for Managing BlackBerry, iPhone, & Windows Mobile Devices 

 (Source: Zenprise) Mobile devices continue to proliferate across the enterprise, driven largely by the increase in worker productivity, efficiency, and flexibility they provide....

 Your Network at Half the Price: Slash Network Hardware Costs With Pre-Owned Equipment 

 (Source: NHR) Pre-owned networking equipment is certainly less expensive than the new variety, but IT managers are often challenged to know when and...

 Best Practices for Managing Business Risks from the Use of IT 

 (Source: Symantec) Based on exhaustive benchmarks conducted by the IT Policy Compliance, this session highlights the relationship between business risks and use of...

 Impact of the Dramatic Increase in Devices on the Cost to Support 

 (Source: Dell) This white paper describes the challenges that CIOs will face in coming years due to a dramatic increase in the number...

 Why Compliance Pays 

 (Source: Symantec) This OnDemand webcast explores the relationship that firms with best compliance records have higher revenue, greater customer retention, lower financial losses...

 Instant download of E-Book Virtualization for Dummies. 

 There's so much more to virtualization, and it is all explained in astonishingly simple terms in this special edition of Virtualization for Dummies....

 Four Principles for Reducing Storage TCO 

 (Source: Hitachi Data Systems) Difficult economic times require new strategies for reducing costs. Where storage technology and economics meet, there are...

 Help Customers Preserve and Share Memories 

 (Source: Kodak) As digital cameras became more and more prevalent, many photofinishers bemoaned the demise of their traditional film and processing business model....

 Technical Web Training: How Interactive Viewer Reduces the Effort to Meet Visualization Requirements 

 (Source: Actuate) Meet data visualization requirements faster and with less development by making Business Intelligence Reporting Tools (BIRT) web output interactive....

 All White Papers | All Webcasts 

Computerworld Reports

 Computerworld Technology Briefing: Application Consolidation 

 Computerworld Technology Briefing: Intelligent Users Use Business Intelligence 

 An Apple for Your Enterprise? 

 All Computerworld Reports 

 Sign up to receive updates on the latest Hardware resources 

Research from ITwhitepapers.com

 Document Security - the protection of confidential information from intellectual property theft 
 The Austin Diagnostic Clinic had to protect confidential information contained in their management documents... 

 Topgrading: How Leading Companies Win by Hiring, Coaching, and Keeping the Best People 
 In this summary, you will learn how leading companies have embraced topgrading, a practical approach to the... 

 Don't get caught with egg on your face! 
 "Virtualization can be like putting all your eggs in one basket.  Ensure you have a resilient... 

 More from ITwhitepapers.com 

IT Jobs

 CIO 
 Storrs, CT  University of Connecticut 

 Java / J2EE Developer 
 Fairfax, VA 

 Perl Web Developer - only permanent r... 
 Nashville, TN  TEAM International 

 Java/Flex Developers 
 New York, NY  Major Financial Services Firm 

 More Jobs  |  Post A Job 

White Papers

 Hidden Cash: Maximizing the Value of Surplus Technology in a Down Economy 

 Impact of the Dramatic Increase in Devices on the Cost to Support 

 Help Customers Preserve and Share Memories 

 Digitize More Memories with the Kodak's Photo Scanning System 

 Get a More Complete Picture of Patient Health 

 An Interactive eBook: Enterprise Security 

 IT Compliance Interactive Tools 

 Solution Overview: Symantec Control Compliance Suite 9.0 

 Information Security Brief by Enterprise Strategy Group 

 EMA's 2008 Survey of IT Governance, Risk and Compliance Management in the Real World 

 Your Network at Half the Price: Slash Network Hardware Costs With Pre-Owned Equipment 

 Instant download of E-Book Virtualization for Dummies. 

 For Best Results, Think Beyond the Box 

 Media Buying Agency Reduces Paper and Storage Needs 

 Deliver Optimal Service Quality 

 IT Best Practices: To Support or Not Support Consumer Owned Smartphones 

 Symantec Security Compliance Brochure 

 Improving Results for Legal Custody of Information 

 Risk Readiness and Redundancy: PCI Compliance Automation 

 Managing Spend on Information Security and Audit for Better Results 

Sponsored Links

 Enhance your career with a Boston University online Masters in CIS 

 Teradata Appliances: New affordable appliances from category leader. 

 Learn How to Create a High Performance Workplace 

 Upgrade to Internet Explorer 8 today. Save time and mitigate security risk. Deploy it now. 

 Thrill Dad this Fathers Day and save up to 66% plus 4 FREE Caramel Apple Tartlets from Omaha Steaks. 

 Network Tools Made By Engineers for Engineers 

 Hitachi IT Operations Analyzer - 30-day free trial 

 FREE Virtualization e-Learning Collection ($159.99 USD value) 

 Deploy faster with Sun's Agile, Modular ESB Platform. 

 Join the conversation about the hottest IT trends with Computerworld on Twitter. 

 With the NEW KODAK i700 Series Scanners get full speed at 300dpi! 

 64-page prescriptive guide to security, compliance, and IT operations. 

 Join us in Computerworld's Inner Circle and receive free research reports. 

 ITwhitepapers.com - Access thousands of white papers on 300+ technical topics. 

 Leverage Your Cisco infrastructure for Superior Application Performance 

 Learn about the AMD Virtual Experience 

 Introducing: Project Icebreaker 

 HP StorageWorks products-control, consolidation and confidence. 

 Introducing the new HP ProLiant G6 server family 

 Control your virtual infrastructure with vWire. 

 Find IT jobs in the Healthcare industry on Dice.com 

 Live Webinar: vSphere & DoubleTake Software: Optimize while you Virtualize 

 Now is the time. Spend less, do more with JBoss. 

 ESET NOD32 with ThreatSense(R) - Get your free trial now! 

 Live Webcast: Building a More Productive Organization  A User Perspective 

 Payback in 9 months with CA Spectrum solutions 

 Combine your communications with Converged Solutions from Sprint. 

 Get business users off your back: Crystal Reports free trial 

 The Planet Storage Cloud: faster access, better prices 

 Create business data you can believe in with data governance 

 Not All QSAs Are Created Equal: What You Should Know Before You Buy 

 The arrival of Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) marks a new era in storage scalability 

 The AMD Virtual Experience Virtual Trade Show 

 About Us 
 Advertise 
 Contacts 
 Editorial Calendar 
 Help Desk 
 Jobs at IDG 
 Privacy Policy 
 Reprints 
 Site Map 

 CIO 
 Computerworld 
 CSO 
 DEMO 
 GamePro 
 Games.net 
 IDC 
 IDG 
 IDG Connect 
 IDG Knowledge Hub 
 IDG TechNetwork 
 IDG Ventures 

 IDG.net 
 IDG World Expo 
 InfoWorld 
 ITwhitepapers 
 ITworld 
 JavaWorld 
 LinuxWorld 
 MacUser 
 Macworld 
 Network World 
 PC World 
 The Industry Standard 
 Playlist 

 Copyright © 1994 - 2009 Computerworld Inc. All
rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium
without express written permission of
Computerworld Inc. is prohibited.
Computerworld and Computerworld.com and the respective logos are
trademarks of International Data Group Inc.