===== FILE: Sanjay 2001.odt =====
﻿July 19, 2001
Mr. Sanjay Kumar
Chief Executive Officer
Computer Associates International
One Computer Associates Plaza
Islandia, NY  11749
Dear Sanjay,
I’d like to take a moment to express on behalf of Aberdeen Group our thanks for the hospitality and quality time that we were so graciously offered at CA World last week, and to pass on some observations.
To begin with, Debra Cattani’s analyst relations team is at the top of the industry, and the support we get from Janice Thomas is superlative.  CA’s analyst relations program is just plain excellent.  It’s that simple.
CA’s customers are more satisfied today than at any time since I started following CA in 1992.  Yes, a lot is going on that changes the business model – and the way business is done.  However, the “CA animosity factor” is much reduced.  That’s really good news.  Unfortunately, the uninformed press still has the “old, bad CA” mindset, but that can be mitigated over time with a  quietly focused PR campaign.
The Ranger situation is a non-starter with customers.  However, I can imagine what you and Charles are going through.  The good news is that most people believe this is much to do about nothing, and that the Ranger crowd will go away or lose badly sooner or later.  
At CA World, the executive presentations, the show floor exhibits, press conferences etc. all played to the broad 3x6 theme.  Unlike some previous CA Worlds which were single product or family focused, the branding was cohesive and the overall World theme was broad enough and inclusive enough to touch a large majority of your customers.  There was something for everyone, and that should energize the sales influencers who attend CA World as well as energize your sales team and channel partners.  It’s so exciting to see the “new CA” gathering momentum – and I mean that in the physics sense.  Congratulations to your team.  
Thanks again your time, and for supporting what I believe is a deep and productive relationship between our companies.  I look forward to speaking with you soon.

Best regards,



Peter S. Kastner
Founder and Chief Research Officer

cc  Russ Artz


