PAGES=8
---
=== p1 ===
AberdeenGroup 
Draft Profile 
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
650 Townsend Street, Suite 3244A 
San Francisco, CA  94103  
(888) 546-4878 
www.linuxcare.com 
Linuxcare, Inc. ⎯ Enterprise Service and Support for All Things Linux 
[NOTE TO LINUXCARE:  As we agreed, this draft will go into “hold status” until mid-
October, when we will finalize the profile for a late-October print date.] 
Preface 
IT management already has contracts in place to address the myriad of daily issues for 
supporting Unix and Windows NT.  For everything from porting existing applications 
to installing a new server, the same “who are you going to call” question that upper 
management asked about Unix and NT must now be answered for Linux.  IT 
management needs 24 x 7, global support for everything from installation and 
upgrades to system development on Linux.  Another pressing need is consulting help 
on how best to integrate and maximize this new business asset.  Top best utilize Linux, 
IT departments also need to educate their internal training staffs, as well as to secure 
ongoing service and support.  And, as enterprises begin implementing business- and 
mission-critical operations on Linux, they will require even greater specialized 
support.  Enterprises need support beyond the kernel itself, into all the facets of 
drivers, utilities, and applications.  A provider must be able to support Linux in the 
context of the customer’s infrastructure.  
Aberdeen finds that many companies choose selective outsourcing agreements rather 
than large, all-in-one contracts.  In doing so, they can retain control over their 
infrastructure by not delegating responsibility for their entire IT environment to one 
company.  Also, they can choose best-of-breed expertise for each service required.  In 
this Profile, Aberdeen describes Linuxcare, Inc., a firm specializing in providing 
enterprise-level Linux-focused service and support. 
Executive Summary 
Linuxcare was an early entrant into the Linux services and support market. Founded 
in 1998, the firm was initially a Linux consulting company, assisting other innovators 
with their Linux integration efforts.  As word of the firm’s expertise spread, Linuxcare 

=== p2 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 2 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
One Boston Place 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
found itself in demand by major system suppliers for training and education of their 
services staffs on Linux.  Fueled by this early success, Linuxcare sought venture 
funding to build a full-fledged Linux specialist services firm.  They have brought on 
senior management talent experienced in serving the needs of the Fortune 1000 and 
continue to recruit talent for each of their key areas of focus ⎯ technical support, 
professional services, education, and certification. 
Successful in their search for funding ⎯ Kleiner Perkins Caulfield and Byers chose 
Linuxcare as its first Linux-related investment ⎯ the firm has set in place a well-
thought out strategy for servicing the needs of the enterprise.  Its strengths have been 
noted by other enterprise suppliers such as Dell, IBM, and Sun, all of whom have 
called upon Linuxcare on multiple fronts, including training and education of their 
inhouse staffs and contracting with Linuxcare for back-end Linux customer support.  
Other vendors, while not having a standing contract, turn to Linuxcare for consulting 
help when faced with complex Linux customer support questions. 
Aberdeen finds that Linuxcare has assembled a strong product and services portfolio, 
lead by experienced management hands, which should be considered by IT technical 
and business executives who wish to begin utilizing Linux as an alternative enterprise 
OS.  Challenges this young firm faces as it grows its base of accounts include growing 
technical and management headcount to handle the anticipated services, and support 
load and placing the necessary quality assurance metrics in place to monitor and 
maintain its current high levels of quality and service.  With contracts already in hand 
⎯ and more to come ⎯ from key hardware and software OEMs as well as service 
providers, Aberdeen views Linuxcare as having proven its viability as a source of 
Linux-and-beyond technical expertise.  [Note: Customer and OEM interviews still in 
progress – this section will be finalized when interviews are completed.] 
Linux Market Growth Drives Demand for Linux Services 
Information technology (IT) departments are increasingly using Linux as the OS of 
choice in many business-critical solutions, such as for email, file ‘n’ print, and Web 
servers.  Linux has emerged from the shadows of the IT infrastructure to be 
acknowledged as reliable and viable for powering low- to mid-sized server 
applications.  Internet-born, Linux is also increasingly used for many Web-based 
server applications such as decision support, caching, storage, domain name services, 
and Web commerce.  Independent software vendors (ISVs) have acknowledged end-
user demand of Linux as an operating system alternative by announcing ports of 
major enterprise applications.  Within the next year, IT managers will have a Linux-
based alternative in every major application area.  
Now that Linux has proven itself, Aberdeen finds that IT management is looking to 
deploy Linux downwards and outwards within the corporation. One issue, though, 
needs addressing prior to beginning larger, more pervasive deployment ⎯ the issue of 
service, support, and consulting expertise.  Although technically technically adept 

=== p3 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 3 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
One Boston Place 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
“gurus” within IT are handling initial deployment of Linux, these same users recognize 
that further deployment requires an increased level of assistance.  Not only do IT 
departments need more internal personnel to be trained on Linux, they also need 
assistance to get the ball rolling.  Their shopping list includes help with education, 
training, and daily service and support, as well as guidance in selecting the right Linux 
products, both hardware and software, for their business needs. Linuxcare Drives 
Towards One-Stop Linux Services 
Linuxcare’s strategy is one of multiple interconnected fronts.  Rather than one specific 
Linux distribution, Linuxcare supports the full spectrum of Linux, from the kernel to 
drivers of any kind to a specific distribution’s package manager.  IT managers can 
choose the Linux distribution(s) that best fit their needs, confident that they will be 
able to get support from Linuxcare.  Following through with this agnostic approach, 
Linuxcare supports all Linux hardware platforms, including Alpha, Intel, MIPS, 
PowerPC, Sparc, and StrongArm.  Beyond the basics of hardware and OS support, 
Linuxcare has crafted an elite set of services that it refers to as its “centers of 
excellence.” 
• A full range of Linux-oriented support services, including a 24 x 7 call 
center and on-site support service, complete with a bug report and tracking 
system.  The call center’s troubleshooting feeds into Linuxcare’s evolving 
Knowledgebase, an on-line interactive support database which contains 
searchable answers to a wide range of questions, Frequently Asked 
Questions, patches and fixes, migration/porting tips, and links to related 
tech-help Web sites.  While the call center and on-site services are fee-for-
service, Knowledgebase is available to anyone at no charge via the 
Linuxcare.com Web site.  Also, all of these services can be private-branded.  
For example, Dell links its Linux customers directly to Linuxcare through 
the www.dell.linuxcare.com Web site.    
• Training and education via Linuxcare University to help management 
understand the value of Linux as an addition to their IT infrastructure 
assets and to “train the trainer.”  In parallel with its own independent 
efforts to bring CEOs and CIOs up to speed on the business benefits of 
Linux, Linuxcare is also working with VA Linux Systems and IBM on their 
fall E-Seminar series.  Training an enterprise’s technical instructors 
provides them with the knowledge to help internal staffs troubleshoot and 
deploy Linux.  As part of this commitment, Linuxcare gurus are serving as 
technical editors for several soon-to-be-published Linux books.  
• Porting and migration assistance via Linuxcare Labs so that Fortune 1000 
firms have global expertise to call upon.  Recruiting individual talent 
around the world, as well as purchasing specialized Linux consulting and 
development businesses, Linuxcare is creating a “virtual” Linux lab where 

=== p4 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 4 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
One Boston Place 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
both simple and complex issues related to porting and migration are solved.  
Customers are helped via telephone, email, or on-site visits. 
• Benchmarking and certification of Linux hardware and software, to give 
management confidence their IT choices will work with Linux.  This 
function is just getting underway but Linuxcare already has a pipeline of 
requests from various vendors who would like to obtain a third-party 
stamp of approval for their products.  
Professional Services Led By Vererans 
Linuxcare’s founders recognized early that seeking to be the Linux specialist services 
firm of choice for the enterprise meant having seasoned management talent that 
would balance and enhance their own well-regarded technical skills.  To complement 
the technical leadership of the company’s founders ⎯ Executive Vice President Arthur 
F. Tyde, III, Chief Technical Officer David L. Sifry, and Vice President of Marketing 
David LaDuke ⎯ in the last six months Linuxcare has fortified its management team 
with executives experienced in top quality IT service and support organizations.  
These executives include: 
• Fernand Sarrat, President and CEO ⎯ Sarrat brings significant top level 
management experience in business development and provides formidable 
insight into services and support.  The knowledge he gained as CEO of 
Cylink is complimented by 23 years of experience at IBM, where he was 
General Manager of Networking-Centric Computing Marketing and 
Services. 
• Anthony V. Pollace, Chief Financial Officer ⎯ Pollace’s experience includes 
over 30 years of senior financial and operations management positions at 
companies ranging from startups that went public to Fortune 500 
multinationals, such as Computer Motion, Scientific Microsystems, and 
Litton Industries. 
• Douglas C. Nassaur, Chief Information Officer ⎯ Nassaur comes to 
Linuxcare from E*Trade Technologies where he served as Vice President of 
Technical Operations.  He was responsible for the implementation of their 
global financial services network.   
• Pat Lambs, Vice President of Service Solutions ⎯ Lambs brings over 30 
years of technology services experience, most recently at Ascent Logic 
Corporation and before that at Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), 
where over the course of 18 years she built DEC’s U.S.-based Professional 
Service Consulting Center. 
• Thomas W. Phillips, Vice President of Worldwide Sales ⎯ Phillips has 25 
years of senior technology sales experience at companies such as Baystone 

=== p5 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 5 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
One Boston Place 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
Software/Remedy Corporation, Sterling Software, and Compugraphic 
Corporation 
Linuxcare has a large stable of Linux gurus, including Andrew Tridgell, original author 
of and current team leader for the Samba software package; Paul Mackerras, a leader 
of Linux’s port to the Power Macintosh and Fujitsu multicomputer platforms; Stephen 
Rothwell, leader of the advance power management driver for Linux; CTO David Sifry, 
who contributed code to GNU Emacs, Majordomo, and the Linux kernel; and David 
Welton, who maintains several packages for the Debian GNU/Linux project.  
Major Industry Suppliers Continue to Seek Linuxcare Expertise 
Linuxcare’s in-depth technical knowledge of Linux has attracted many industry 
players who have engaged the firm on multiple fronts: 
• Aberdeen observes that many major suppliers of hardware, software, and 
services have quietly sought the firm’s assistance in training their own 
personnel.  
• Dell, IBM, and Sun have publicly sought Linuxcare’s technical service and 
support capabilities as they bring their first Linux offerings to market.  Dell 
has contracted with Linuxcare to provide transparent back-end support for 
its Linux-based OptiPlex and Dimension desktop lines, its Precision 
workstation line, and its PowerEdge Servers.  IBM has given Linuxcare the 
contract to support Linux on the RS/6000 line. Sun has signed Linuxcare to 
provide support for its first Linux offering ⎯ the Star Office suite ⎯ from 
the acquired German-firm Star Division.  Each of these sites employs a 
mirrored site, e.g. www.dell.linuxcare.com, www.sun.linuxcare.com, and 
www.ibm.linuxcare.com.  [Note: Need to verify Sun and IBM mirrors 
(currently not on Web).  Internal use only? Ask Linuxcare.] 
• Major Linux distributor TurboLinux tapped Linuxcare to provide services 
and support to its North American customers. 
• McMillan Publishing, a retail-oriented vendor of a wide range of computer-
related products, has signed Linuxcare to provide services and support for 
its repackaging of the Mandrake Linux distribution. 
• Several book publishers, notably [Note: names coming from Linuxcare] 
have retained Linuxcare for technical editing expertise of soon-to-be 
published Linux books. 
• Hitachi subsidiary Densa Techno Tokyo K.K., a Japanese integration and 
support services provider for consumer electronics, retail, and information 
systems businesses, is partnering with Linuxcare to provide high-level 
support for the Japanese market. 
• VA Linux Systems and IBM engaged Linuxcare as a strategic partner in their 
E-Seminar Series.  The Series targets CEOs and CIOs who need to learn the 

=== p6 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 6 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
One Boston Place 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
business benefits of employing Linux as an integral part of their e-
commerce push.   
Aberdeen anticipates more major partnerships and contracts will be coming to 
Linuxcare in the near future from several avenues, including major application 
software vendors and some major consulting and integrator firms. [Note: To be 
fleshed out as soon as Linuxcare can release names] 
A Services Portfolio in Step with Linux Enterprise Adoption Needs 
Aberdeen finds that Linux adoption among enterprise firms is starting to accelerate 
overall.  Business and enterprise firms are at different stages of Linux deployment.  
Many enterprise firms are now starting to look at Linux and have requested that IT 
prepare a white paper explaining Linux’s strengths and weaknesses for the firm’s 
particular needs.  Other firms have had Linux servers running business-critical 
applications such as email for some time, using online Web resources to assist them 
with installing and maintaining their system, but are now moving forward with more 
extensive deployment.  Still other firms, albeit a small number, are fairly far along in 
their Linux deployment throughout the enterprise and have recognized that there is 
insufficient in-house knowledge and manpower.  
Regardless of the company’s current stage, Linuxcare’s services are comprehensive:  
• Linuxcare.com:  The Web site supports customers in all stages of Linux 
product use, from evaluating alternative solutions through maintaining 
installed Linux-based solutions.  The interactive Linuxcare Knowledgebase 
contains information and fixes for most commonly encountered problems 
and is continually updated.  The site also provides links to other Web-based 
technical resources for Linux-related issues, problem solving sites, and 
Linux “tech tips” for optimizing Linux in a multitude of environments.  
Although technically focused on the needs of IT implementers and 
developers at present, Linuxcare is in the process of stocking the site with 
the material oriented towards IT management and buyers. [Note: Need 
examples of coming features from Linuxcare.] 
• Technical Support Services: Customized to each client’s needs, Linuxcare 
offers a full array of support packages ⎯ Bronze, Silver, Gold, and Platinum 
⎯ which vary in price level, response time, point of contact, and number of 
contacts, from one-time service all the way to dedicated 24 x 7 support.  In 
addition, Linuxcare offers backline technical support, invisibly integrating 
with another company’s resources to provide support for overflow and 
Linux-specific problems.  Linuxcare currently offers backline support for 
large OEMs such as Dell Computer Corporation and TurboLinux North 
America.  Currently all services are offered in English with their Asian 
support facilities targeted for completion in [Note: Need date from 
Linuxcare].  While primarily telephone-based at present, Linuxcare plans to 

=== p7 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 7 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
One Boston Place 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
move to email and Web site support for basic questions, escalating to call 
center technical staff for more complex problems. 
• Professional Services: Providing incident-specific consulting or complete 
on-site project management, this division will handle as much or as little of 
a firm’s Linux IT needs as the customer would like.  Linuxcare can assist 
with integrating Linux into any enterprises’ infrastructure, with porting 
and development of proprietary software to Linux-based systems, and with 
ongoing IT systems management. 
• Linuxcare University: Leveraging Linuxcare’s guru knowledge base, this 
branch offers instruction on all levels of Linux development and 
management.  The current focus is on “training the trainers.”  Courses 
include: Linux System Administration, Linux Network Administration, 
Linux Security, Linux Overview for Windows NT Professionals, Linux 
Administration for Windows NT Professionals, Extreme Samba, and Linux 
for Executives.  Enterprises also may contract Linuxcare for custom training 
taught at customer-specified sites.  These courses are designed to fulfill 
requirements set by the Linux Professional Institute’s certification 
guidelines.  
• Linuxcare Labs: Vendor- and distribution-neutral, this division tests 
functionality of hardware and software on Linux.  Products that meet all 
testing requirements receive a “Linuxcare Labs Certified” mark.  When 
evaluating and purchasing Linux-based solutions, customers can easily 
access performance results of certified products through the Linuxcare.com 
Web site.  Notable suppliers that have sought certification and received it 
are Dell Computer, for all of the product lines which Linuxcare supports, 
and Compaq Computer for its DeskPro product line.  Aberdeen expects 
Linuxcare Labs, still very much in its infancy, will be recruiting senior-level 
expertise to head this quality assurance sector of the firm. 
Aberdeen Conclusions and Observations 
Aberdeen is convinced by extensive market research that a credible number of IT 
organizations believe Linux will play a role in their future information technology 
infrastructure.  Linux is not a flash in the pan, but rather is a market that will grow 
rapidly over at least the next several years.   
Linux has proven itself up to the challenge inherent in enterprise applications at the 
server level.  And it is showing signs of taking off in the desktop arena.  Linux 

=== p8 ===
 
Linuxcare, Inc. 
 8 
Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
One Boston Place 
Boston, Massachusetts 
02108 
USA 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
www.aberdeen.com 
© 1999 Aberdeen Group, Inc. 
All rights reserved 
January 1999 
Aberdeen Group is a computer and communications 
research and consulting organization closely monitoring 
enterprise-user needs, technological changes and market
developments. 
Based on a comprehensive analytical framework,  
Aberdeen provides fresh insights into the future of 
computing and networking and the implications for 
users and the industry. 
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select 
group of domestic and international clients requiring 
strategic and tactical advice and hard answers on how to 
manage computer and communications technology. 
 
 
 
 
seems well suited to taking its place as a key OS in a Web-based commerce push due 
to its reliability and stability.   
However, the “freeware” business model for Linux open software means buyers get 
the support they paid for, namely little to none.  In today’s enterprise IT world, an 
operating system with no support is a non-starter.  Moreover, today’s much leaner 
hardware suppliers are easily convinced that support for a new but complex product 
can be outsourced to a well-grounded and Internet-wired services firm. 
Enter Linuxcare with a portfolio of services that allows a firm at any stage ⎯ 
exploratory, trial run, limited deployment, full deployment ⎯ to find answers and 
assistance.   
[Note: Section to be concluded after customer interviews are completed.] 
 

