AberdeenGro
up
Development 
Tools:
1998 
Practice 
Summary
May 1998
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
One Boston Place
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
USA
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 2
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
www.aberdeen.com
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 3
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Aberdeen Group is a Boston-based, computer and 
communications consulting and market-research 
organization.
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select 
group of domestic and international clients.    Each requires 
a combination of strategic advice and pragmatic, 
experience-based action plans.    Assignments range from 
corporate and product positioning and organizational 
planning to in-depth market segment research.    Aberdeen 
consults on mergers and acquisitions, corporate positioning 
and investor relations, transaction-processing benchmarks, 
and has special expertise in software and midrange    
computer markets.
In carrying out assignments, Aberdeen uses a proprietary, 
comprehensive, analytical framework providing fresh 
insight into the complex future of computing and 
communications, both from a technological and a market- 
dynamics perspective.    Aberdeen also offers retainer-fee 
programs to a group of continuing clients.
Aberdeen principals and staff are recognized industry 
figures with hundreds of years of combined high-tech 
industry, research and financial community experience 
among them.    They are quoted extensively in industry trade 
and business publications.    Each is a frequent conference 
and seminar speaker.
In addition to client-related research and consulting, 
Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, Aberdeen 
Viewpoints and Profiles, which summarize its analysis and 
research findings.
Information contained in this publication has been obtained from 
sources we believe to be reliable, but is not warranted by us.    Opinions 
reflect judgment at the time and are subject to change without notice.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 4
The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations 
mentioned in this publication are the property of their respective 
holders.
Warning:    This publication is protected by United States copyright law 
and international treaties.    Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents 
of this publication are copyrighted by Aberdeen Group, Inc., and may not 
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means without prior written consent.    Unauthorized 
reproduction or distribution of this publication, or any portion of it, may 
result in severe civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the 
maximum extent necessary to protect the rights of the publisher. 
© 1998 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
DEVELOPMENT TOOLS PRACTICE
V
Description, Focus and Benefits
v
Strategic Market Questions
v
The Audience for This Report
vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3
Key Aberdeen Findings
4
APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT DEFINED
6
Core Development-Tool Components
6
Analysis/Design Tool
6
Programming Tools
7
Testing Tools
8
Deployment Tools
8
How an Integrated System Works
9
Application Development Environments  (ADEs)
9
Component Development Toolsets
9
Internet Development Toolsets
10
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
11
Impact of Major IT Trends
11
Supplier Success Factors
13
User Success Factors
13
Internet Deployment
13
Component-based Development
14
SUPPLIER ABSTRACTS
16
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 6
Borland International Inc. (Inprise Inc.)
16
Bluestone Software Inc.
17
Computer Associates International Inc.
18
Compuware Corporation
19
Forte Software Inc.
20
IBM Corporation
21
Intersolv Inc.
22
Mercury Interactive Corporation
22
Microsoft Corp.
23
NetDynamics Inc.
24
Oracle Corp.
25
Progress Software Corporation
26
Rational Software Corporation
27
Sybase Inc.
28
Symantec Corporation
28
SunSoft, Inc. (a subsidiary of Sun Microsystems, Inc.)
29
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 7
Preface
Development Tools Practice 
Description, Focus and Benefits
The Development Tools practice covers software tools, libraries, 
and environments for designing, coding, testing, deploying, 
maintaining, and upgrading programs – and especially those tools 
that are creating enterprises’ new business-critical competitive-
advantage applications.    Thus, the Development Tools practice 
covers such key new development technologies as Java, 
deployment tools, data-aware Visual Programming Environments, 
components, and upgrade tools that can also be used for Year-2000 
efforts.
A radical shift in market needs in the last 1 1/2 years due to the 
Internet and Year 2000 has led to today’s mass confusion in the 
development tool market.    This shift has also increased the overall 
need for programmer productivity, to take advantage of scarce 
programmer resources in enterprises’ business-critical initiatives 
and strategies.    Aberdeen’s Development Tools practice therefore 
assesses development tools by their ability to deliver real, long-
term business benefits in programmer productivity and 
application scalability. In particular, Aberdeen emphasizes 
scalability to support large software development efforts and 
teams of programmers, and software tools’ ability to leverage field-
proven technologies instead of reinventing the wheel.
The Development Tools practice continues to be a key part of both 
the System Platforms & Architectures and the Network Services 
areas of Aberdeen research.    To take full advantage of increasingly 
complex hardware architectures and database management 
systems, IS buyers must consider the capabilities of the 
development tool as well as the raw speed of the system.    To 
implement, deploy, and upgrade scalable E-commerce solutions 
swiftly, IS buyers must consider the capabilities of Web-site 
authoring tools and Java tools.
Strategic Market Questions

Where is Java suitable in 1998? 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 8

What should IS do to hedge their bets in the war between 
Microsoft and non-Microsoft visions of Internet 
development? 

How should users fit the new development tools bundled 
with packaged applications into an overall development 
strategy? 

Does Year 2000 offer an opportunity to resuscitate legacy 
applications and fit them with new technology, or to replace 
them? 

Are reusable object "components" here to stay? 

What do the new frameworks or Network Computing 
Architectures (e.g., Oracle’s "cartridges") buy the software 
architect and developer? 
The Audience for This Report
This Aberdeen Group Practice Summary is a deliverable in a 
comprehensive service that includes Aberdeen published research 
and customized professional services aimed at executives who 
must make strategic business decisions regarding Information 
Technology.
This practice summary aims to provide information for strategic IS 
buyers of both computing solutions — especially those seeking 
competitive advantage by rapid development of new or customized 
solutions — and network services — especially those needing to 
customize and evolve complex enterprise networks and distributed 
applications to meet the needs of new technologies such as the 
Internet.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 1
Chapter One
Executive Summary
Application development consists of the tools, languages, 
compilers, utilities, processes, and components that must be 
employed to create usable software.
Application development is one of the primary means by which the 
IS organization delivers technology to the end-user.    Software 
applications are either built by hand or purchased off-the-shelf.    
Even when ready-made, application development plays a critical 
role in customization of existing packages or in enabling disparate 
packages and communications mechanisms to work together.
The application development tools and related software market is 
estimated at $2-3 billion (a conservative estimation).    This estimate 
includes international sales, however the majority of tools sales is 
in US, with the second most active market being Europe.    In fact, 
the US is viewed as by far the most active, prolific, and 
knowledgeable country for developing and delivering software. 
Several dominant suppliers compete directly with on another for 
the lion’s share of revenue and market share.    Application 
development tools revenues have been dominated by 3GL and 
Application Development Environment (ADE) sales, which are now 
being superceded by component-based and Internet development 
tools.    While the entire application development market is 
growing rapidly, much of this growth is fueled by enterprises 
trying to build new Internet applications, extend client-server 
applications to the Web, and an increased interest in distributed 
computing, particularly Java. 
Application development demands are often the catalyst for 
technology or platform purchases.    This is to ensure that IS staff 
development expertise can be brought to bear on getting the 
greatest benefit from the computing infrastructure and handling 
end-user requests for applications and capabilities.
There are four substantial market trends providing impetus to 
toolset sales today:

Internet/Intranet/Extranet development;

Component production and assembly;
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 2

Distributed-application deployment; and 

Application-development modeling and repositories.
Component development/assembly and Internet application 
deployment will be two of the thorniest issues that IT will have to 
address in the application development space over the next five 
years.    These two trends, more than any others, will drive the 
market and products forward to the fully distributed and highly 
scalable multi-tiered deployment environment of the future.
Application development plays a key role in the enterprise as a 
way to enable businesses to incorporate and utilize productive and 
innovative technology.    Application development is often the first 
place where new technology is integrated into the enterprise, as 
shown by the recent enterprise adoption of Java development 
toolsets for electronic commerce applications, distributed 
application deployment, and component development.
Development tools are also on enterprises’ critical path for 
achieving application and systems hardware and software benefits. 
The better the development tool, the quicker the solutions arrive 
and the better integrated they are with existing and legacy 
applications.    The more rapid the flow of applications and 
upgrades, the greater the bottom-line competitive advantage is, 
and the more likely it is to remain a long-term advantage.    In fact, 
application development tools are often the gating factor in 
delivering new competitive-advantage applications, such as E-
Commerce or Data Warehousing initiatives.
Home-grown applications development must be a well-defined and 
managed exercise, however, as major bottom-line disasters and 
maintenance costs can occur if the development effort is 
mismanaged and ineffective.    When well-implemented, however, 
in-house application development can be a means to avoid stiff 
service and licensing costs of supplier software. 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 3
Chapter Two
Summary of Findings
Aberdeen research has determined that there are four primary 
motivators that drive buyers of application development tools, 
ancillary products, and software for managing the development 
process itself.    As noted above, these factors are:

Internet/Intranet/Extranet development;

Component production and assembly;

Distributed-application deployment; and 

Application development modeling and repositories.
Internet/Intranet/Extranet development.    The development of 
applications that can run in part or in whole over the Internet, 
providing widespread access to information for users and potential 
research and sales to companies, has significantly impacted the 
way organizations view application development today.    No one 
can choose an application development technology today without 
considering its potential impact or lack thereof on the Internet.    
Likewise, no application can be developed without first 
determining where it might need to support the Internet, be 
deployed on the Internet, or interact with Internet applications.    
The Internet has become both a technology and an application 
platform for deployment. 
Component production and assembly. Components can be defined as 
self-contained entities that can execute on their own and not 
necessarily, as an object does, operate as part of a larger hierarchy. 
The ultimate goal of such development is to use components as the 
building blocks for highly scalable and distributed applications.    
Components can be easily assembled or combined to make an 
application that can execute on disparate machines and should be 
especially effective for creating highly scalable, multi-tiered, and 
distributed applications — deployable on the Internet.    Users hope 
to gain faster development through component reuse, the ability to 
purchase third-party component libraries, easier upgrades and 
maintenance through modular software design, the creation of 
more scalable distributed applications, and less expensive 
deployment and development cycles.    Components also provide a 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 4
means to reuse legacy applications by “wrapping” them as large-
scale business objects. 
Distributed-application deployment.    Application partitioning, the 
ability to assign parts or components of an application to different 
nodes or environments, is a key requirement in order to scale 
application performance on enterprise networks and the Internet. 
One of the means by which organizations are addressing this 
concern is by first using the proper development tools that support 
application partitioning or component development to create the 
services to be distributed, and then putting in place an application 
server or a component model that will give some guidelines to 
component interaction.
Application development modeling and repositories.    Application 
modeling is becoming more important as component-based 
development and distributed deployment of applications become 
more universal.    Applications will not stop increasing in 
complexity, although the individual pieces may be less complex, 
the effort necessary to develop, deploy, and maintain large 
applications will continue to rise.    Organizations are now realizing 
that visually building diagrams of applications and data, along with 
their dependencies, and maintaining that model through the life 
cycle of the application, is an important step in preempting 
performance problems, deployment issues, and other difficulties 
that typically arise.    The repository then becomes the 
clearinghouse for the application models, database schemas, 
generated code, and components that are used to create the 
application.
Key Aberdeen Findings

Today, IS development-tool buyers are focused on 
delivering Internet capabilities, creating distributed 
applications, and implementing competitive-advantage 
applications.    In the past, the datacenter bought toolsets 
bundled with the hardware, but in today’s fast moving 
desktop markets, departments and individual developers 
buy inexpensive toolsets, such as Visual Basic, for rapid 
development of small applications.    Multi-tier application 
development and deployment is the norm, and both 
application servers and the tools to build and deliver 
services on them are critical to IS.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 5

IS buyers are more frequently looking to the development 
toolset to implement Intranets and E-commerce (the 
fastest-growing segment of the development-tool market). 
They are looking to deploy a static marketing or 
information based sites, interactive new-generation 
dynamic Web sites, or “Web upgrades” — taking an 
existing client-server application and giving users access 
over the Web or deploying part of the application as a 
Web-based component.

Companies are finding that the retraining efforts for 
component-based development and even Internet 
development are as stiff as the learning curve for object-
oriented development.

Java will not replace C++ and C as the most popular 
language, but will be used for new-application 
development, especially on the server. 

Frameworks — bundles of Application programming 
Interfaces (API) and components that supportcross-
platform development — show great potential for 
delivering development-cost savings to enterprises 
seeking to “write once, deploy many”.    However, 
frameworks are presently slow to sell, since many users 
view initial framework solutions as complex and 
proprietary.

The current object model market is divided between Java 
and CORBA    versus ActiveX and COM/DCOM.    Java gives 
users freedom to deploy on all platforms.    CORBA 
provides cross-platform communications and excellent 
data access.    ActiveX    and COM/DCOM are    excellent 
component options for a mostly Microsoft environment.    
The best option today seems to be to use COM and DCOM 
on the front-end and CORBA and Java to back end data 
access with a bridge between the two. 

Windows NT is the defacto development environment, 
displacing Unix and C, regardless of the platform on 
which an application may be deployed.

Indirect channels continue to be a primary source of sales 
for application development environment suppliers, as 
systems integrators and application providers buy and 
use toolset suppliers’ tools both to implement their own 
solutions and as tools to integrate others’ solutions.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 6

The application development market is growing well.    
The supplier community remains somewhat stable, with 
most of the activity still coming from several key 
entrenched players (e.g., Microsoft, Oracle, Sybase, 
Borland, Symantec, IBM, Forte, and Progress) as they 
deliver new offerings to address market demands.    New 
growth has been most rapid in the Internet development 
and deployment space, where newcomers are 
proliferating at a rapid rate.    Heavy consolidation is 
expected in this market within the next three years as 
these companies get purchased by database and other 
heavy hitters or quietly begin to disappear due to lack of 
differentiating features or scalability.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 7
Chapter Three
Application Development Defined
The Development Tools practice covers software tools, libraries, 
and environments for designing, coding, testing, deploying, 
maintaining, and upgrading programs – and especially those tools 
that are creating enterprises’ new business-critical competitive-
advantage applications.    Thus, the Development Tools practice 
covers such key new development technologies as Java, 
deployment tools, data-aware Visual Programming Environments, 
components, and upgrade tools that can also be used for Year-2000 
efforts.
The Development Tools practice continues to be a key part of both 
the System Platforms & Architectures and the Network Services 
areas of Aberdeen Research.    To take full advantage of 
increasingly complex hardware architectures and database 
management systems, IS buyers must consider the capabilities of 
the development tool as well as the raw speed of the system.    To 
implement, deploy, and upgrade scalable E-commerce solutions 
swiftly, IS buyers must consider the capabilities of Web-site 
authoring tools and Java tools.
Today’s hot development-toolset markets allow upwards of 10 
suppliers to flourish at a medium size ($40-300 million in 
revenues).    These suppliers report meeting only 1 to 2 competitors 
in any given sales situation (although customers may typically do 
due diligence on 3-4 toolsets).    Thus, this market allows creation of 
many niches, including modeling tools, testing tools, and 
Java/Internet tools.
Core Development-Tool Components
The typical basic development toolset may include:

An analysis/design tool;

A programming tool;

A testing tool; and

Deployment tools.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 8
Analysis/Design Tool
Developers use design and modeling tools to visually create a 
“map” of a complex application or database from which it can be 
built and documented.    This is done to ensure an effective 
application or database and to help the developer translate verbal 
requirements into an application or database that works.    Some 
tools specialize in creating database schemas, while others 
generate code from the application model.    Modeling and design 
tools are currently moving to support object-oriented development 
techniques in the next generation.
Design tools are also sold separately as modeling tools, usually 
associated with a repository.    Object-oriented modeling tools and 
object-oriented analysis and design are the hot new technologies in 
this arena, especially the Unified Modeling Language (UML), 
proposed by Rational and backed by Oracle and Microsoft.    UML is 
the language of choice for object-oriented modeling.    Most 
development-toolset suppliers are now among its supporters and 
are working quickly to fully implement the specification in their 
toolsets.
Programming Tools
Programming tools are the means by which developers translate an 
abstract design into source code.    They also support key new 
programming technologies and platforms, allowing developers to 
incorporate them in production applications.    The better the 
programming tool, the more likely it is that developers will be able 
to fully exploit these new technologies to create competitive 
advantage applications.    Today’s languages of choice are C and C++, 
with Visual Basic not far behind. 
Today’s developers are increasingly moving to Java programming 
tools.    Java is clearly the platform-independent language of choice 
going forward and application development tools suppliers should 
implement compatibility with Java, JavaScript, JavaBeans, JDBC, 
and other related technologies as soon as possible to stay on the 
curve.    Benefits to the developer include the ability to reuse as 
much existing code as possible, language translators that convert 
applications from C or C++ or any other language to Java, CORBA 
support, IIOP, JavaBean creation and registry, and in the Microsoft-
only arena ActiveX, Microsoft Transaction Server, and Active 
Server Pages.
Suppliers delivering C and C++ development environments are 
meeting the demands of programmers for a more productive and 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 9
easier to use tool by integrating its elements, such as a debugger, 
editor, and performance profiler, together.    Many tools allow the 
integration of Java code with C and C++ or plan to generate both 
Java and C++ eventually.    Other integration points include the tight 
coherence with version control and project management features. 
Due to the interest in Internet/Intranet applications and distributed 
computing, tools suppliers have had to support a wide range of 
middleware solutions; provide various ways to revamp, extend, 
and integrate legacy applications and data; and support ActiveX 
and OLE technologies. 
Suppliers delivering Java compilers are trying to make them as 
productive for developers as possible.    Java environments are also 
working towards seamless integration with C and C++ code.    
Current efforts to mature the Java language, and hence its 
enterprise viability, include whole-hearted support for Java Beans 
and Enterprise Java Beans.    Java developers will be able to choose 
form a palette of Beans to assemble an applications.    Other 
enhancements to Java tools include an overall interest in data 
access and the ability to create data-intensive applications.    While 
just as problematic in its inception as its client-server counterpart 
(Open Database Connectivity), JDBC support is necessary for every 
Internet development tool supplier, as is the ability to deliver 
optimized code to run on high performance application servers, 
Testing Tools
Automated software testing is the means that many are using to 
rescue development projects from failure or interminable 
development delays that, in the end, deliver unreliable software.    
It is not enough to merely automate an existing manual process, an 
act which may only perpetuate current problems.    Key to the 
success of the automated testing approach are good software test 
design, a comprehensive suite of reusable test scripts, a reliable 
testing methodology, and good test process management, including 
a test asset repository.    Automated testing, compared to manual 
testing processes and executed effectively, can dramatically reduce 
the application testing cycle and its cost by as much as 50-75 
percent.
Testing is just now coming to the forefront of developer’s minds as 
the Year 2000 code remediation efforts loom.    Also, as component 
development becomes more of a reality it brings unique testing 
problems and issues to bear on the software quality assurance (QA) 
cycle.    Testing tools are primarily automated, with the fastest-
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 10
growing grow segment of the testing tools market being Windows. 
Testers are running testing tools on PCs as a means of supplying a 
low cost, test environment. 
Deployment Tools
Application partitioning tools seem to be the most advanced in 
terms of providing server-side programming support.    Tools in this 
market are split between high-end partitioning applications and 
simple component-based development tools that support the 
development of modules that can be deployed on the server, but 
include no particular load balancing or management features.
How an Integrated System Works
Today’s integrated development toolsets tend to fall into one of 
three categories (each with its own approach to integration):

Application Development Environments (ADEs);

Component-Based Toolsets; and

Internet Toolsets.
Application Development Environments    (ADEs)
ADEs are today’s version of the client-server development toolset.    
They include not only the high level development productivity 
features of Rapid Application Development (RAD) technology, but 
the editors and robust capabilities of a 3GL.    They tie these 
together with team programming capabilities.    ADEs support 
multi-tiered deployment strategies, application partitioning, and 
often Web development.
There are approximately three ADE cost tiers:    a low channel-sales 
price range of $400-1000 per unit; a moderate price point that 
typically includes more deployment options in the $1000-$3000 
range; and the high-end price range of $3000-$30,000 for larger 
platforms.    Today’s ADE suppliers that are keeping up the multi-
tier and Internet deployment demands of users are growing up to 
50% per year and becoming increasingly strategic to the IS buyer.
Component Development Toolsets
Component development toolsets aim to assemble generic 
components (typically large business or business-process objects) 
and then to assemble them jigsaw-puzzle fashion.    Component 
development is becoming a strategic choice for many organizations 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 11
that need highly adaptable applications to meet the needs of a 
changing marketplace.    Today’s IT organizations are integrating 
components into development efforts such as customizing and 
integrating complex package applications (e.g., SAP or Baan), 
providing highly scalable applications, integrating the Internet into 
a computing environment, creating electronic commerce 
applications, and maximizing reuse of existing resources, such as 
C++ and Visual Basic code.
Modular code has many basic benefits that have been widely 
discussed, but Aberdeen research indicates that easily assembled 
components combined to make an application that executes on 
disparate machines are especially effective for creating highly 
scalable, multitiered, and distributed applications — deployable on 
the Internet.    Components also provide a means to break more 
monolithic applications apart into usable code chunks.    Components 
deliver the extensibility necessary for applications in a changeable 
environment and allow users to create a series of shared components 
that can be used as application and network services.
Component-based development should continue to be a critical 
new programming technique for the next 5-10 years.    There are 
not a large number of component assembly tools available at this 
time; however, more are expected as Java grows in popularity and 
more developers look to reuse existing components in new 
development efforts.    Java and legacy code are expected to provide 
the largest number of components.    Similarly, Microsoft’s Common 
Object Model (COM) is all about components. 
Internet Development Toolsets
Internet development requires new toolset capabilities.    The key 
requirements are:

Web-site authoring tools;

New user-interface features;

Transaction and scalability support;

Java and applet support; and

Distributed-object support.
Most present Intranet applications offer significant 
communications-cost savings and expand corporate text-data 
access to new and remote end users.    Potential long-term benefits 
include electronic commerce (carrying out commercial 
transactions over the Internet), thus cutting sales and transaction 
costs, saving time, and gaining an opportunity to collect new 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 12
customer data.    Long-term benefits include rapid access to 
external information for strategic planning, delivering global 
solutions faster, better leverage of corporate databases, and 
effectively keeping pace with end-user demands.
New Internet application development environments are focused 
heavily on deployment of the developed applications and less on 
the means of developing them.    Such Internet toolsets often 
include application server middleware to help organizations deal 
with the volume of traffic that an Internet application will 
experience. 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 13
Chapter Four
Issues and Challenges
Application development is one of the first places in which IT 
trends reveal themselves, as developers of next generation and 
competitive-advantage applications learn, absorb, and implement 
the tools and skills necessary to create them.    Thus, technology 
trends such as Internet development, application server 
technology, component-based development, and the advent of new 
programming languages such as Java, will change the face not only 
of the application development market but also, in future years, of 
all other facets of computing.
Impact of Major IT Trends
The Internet.    The need to deploy scalable 
Internet/Extranet/Intranet applications is one of primary factors 
changing application development today.    Deployment of 
applications, rather than the development tool, is becoming the 
primary concern of application developers and a key differentiator 
for Internet-only application development environment providers. 
Other technologies, such as middleware, object request brokers, 
and transaction processing engines that maintain communication 
between the various elements of an Internet application are 
becoming increasingly important.
While Java has gained considerable important once in this quest 
for the ultimate Internet-friendly language, it will not replace C++ as 
the language of choice for developing applications, regardless of 
deployment, within the next 2-3 years.
Transition to client-server and network-centric applications.    More 
and more applications will be built using a multi-tier architecture 
that requires applications to be built as logical modules that can 
exist across a network and not necessarily on the same physical 
hardware.    Such applications must still be aware of one another 
and able to communicate among themselves and with other 
applications.    Hence users’ interest in components and objects, 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 14
which enable the creation of highly scalable and adaptable 
applications.
Application servers, on which application logic is delivered to the 
client, are now a standard tier in most organizations.    Increased 
server performance and decreased prices have delivered a 
price/performance ratio that make this feasible in most 
organizations.    While most users are balking at the use of NC’s, but 
attracted to the price point, thin client applications are being built 
everywhere and deployed in many possible scenarios simply for 
the ease in maintenance and the ability to put more applications on 
the user’s desktop without more cost.
Component-based and object-oriented application development.    
Tools in this area are splitting into two distinct categories:    those 
for building object and components, and those for putting objects 
and components together.    Aberdeen predicts that Microsoft’s 
DCOM will, by default, become the primary means of 
communications between these objects.    Most users will support 
CORBA through DCOM on the applications side.    Current trends 
indicate that holdouts will continue to use CORBA for data or 
backend-server access because of its superior performance in this 
realm, but CORBA will typically bridge to DCOM on the client-side. 
Components will be a major impetus in revamping legacy 
technology and bringing new capabilities to old data and 
applications.    In addition, the proliferation of components and 
component-based development will require developers to use 
repositories and modeling tools, but not at first.    Component-based 
development can more easily reflect the internal business process, 
which is then exposed to external customers and business partners 
through and Internet application, and therefore will more tightly 
integrate technology into the business itself.
Year 2000.    IS organizations are keeping their noses to the 
grindstone to make their applications Year 2000-compliant.    This 
effort has cut back on the amount of time and resources available 
for other objectives in application development and will continue 
to do so post-Year 2000 as companies re-architect and repair their 
systems after the fact.
On the other hand, many new systems are being implemented now, 
such as SAP and PeopleSoft applications, in order to avoid 
remediating older and legacy systems.    These new applications 
will have to be updated and customized further to truly become 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 15
useful to the organization and thus will require attention after Year 
2000. 
Application development is still taking place in most organizations, 
as new applications are required in order to keep up the 
competitive pace.    Most organizations are trying to lessen the 
impact of Year 2000 efforts by remediating the code of existing 
applications rather than developing new ones. 
Supplier Success Factors
Suppliers successful in delivering application development 
environments over the next 1-2 years will have the following 
characteristics:

A strong VAR, ISV and reseller channel to provide 
delivery, applications, and integration services to the 
customer to make them successful in record time.

Modular application code and component application 
development capabilities, providing reusable code 
“templates” or application modules that deliver 70% of 
the code needed for    a working application — which in 
turn speeds time-to-market and increases development 
productivity.

A clear blueprint for integrating legacy systems as well as 
custom applications with new technology.

Engine technology that allows users to link in the 
appropriate capabilities to create scalable applications 
and add new features, such as business rules and 
transaction processing.

Support of all industry standards. 
User Success Factors
Faced with the above mentioned industry trends, users should be 
wary of the technology purchases they make.    There are several 
key guidelines for choosing and implementing systems effectively 
for Internet and component toolsets:
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 16
Internet Deployment

Users should buy tools and technology that answer a 
specific tactical business problem, but should keep one 
eye out for the future.    Whatever is brought in to the 
organization at the beginning will most likely turn out to 
be used for future projects as well, and will proliferate 
across the enterprise. 

Characteristics to look for in an Internet Development 
Tool include:
1. Optimized client-side browser software and server-
side Web-server software communications
2. Management of server-side programming 
capabilities
3. Provides a mechanism for “stateful” 
communications
4. Includes or incorporates Web-site authoring tools
5. Provides for new user-interface features, such as 
browser plug-ins and folder browsing
6. Includes Java and applet creation generation
7. Supports distributed objects, be it ActiveX controls 
or Java applets
8. Will support long-term Internet architecture 
features — web-server hardware, complex data 
management, Internet systems administration, data 
warehousing, and electronic commerce
9. Delivers a scalable infrastructure that contains a 
transaction processing engine or allows users to 
plug one in
10.Provides a means for the integration of Internet 
applications with legacy applications and data
11.Delivers features for Web-enabling existing client-
server applications
12.Leverages scalability, programmer-productivity, and 
software-lifecycle support technologies of past 
toolsets

If possible, users should work with a third party service 
provider to determine the best possible Internet solution 
for its particular application’s needs before jumping 
ahead and delivering a new Web site or data-intensive 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 17
application.    It is also a good idea to project forward 2 to 
3 years when identifying useful tools and technologies to 
establish a basic idea of how large an organization’s 
Internet presence may grow.

Lately, it has not been difficult to get buy in from upper 
management to    build an Internet/Intranet application.    
The difficulty lies in the resulting high expectations, 
especially for retail and commercial sites that are 
expected to generate revenue.    It is important to be very 
clear about the level of web presence that is expected, 
what can be safely and quickly deployed in the time 
allotted, and how much time and expense will be involved
Component-based Development

Treat components cautiously.    It is a good idea to 
implement new systems using components, but it will 
take twice as long as you expect, it will cost three times 
more than expected, it will take 3 years to get a return on 
your investment, and the result will be less than expected 
when it is delivered.      However, components can speed 
up delivery of solutions, increase application 
development productivity, ease integration of legacy 
systems with new technologies, and deliver software 
flexibility and extensibility through pre-built and third-
party components.    For example, IT organizations would 
be able to build or buy a suite of components that can be 
used to assemble an application. 

Components exist independently and can be deployed in a 
distributed architecture — self-contained yet 
interoperable components in a distributed multi-tier 
environment make a more scaleable system.    Because the 
are self-contained, components can be removed or added 
at will with minimal effect.    They ease maintenance 
because they may be    added or subtracted to an 
environment to add functionality or reduce requirements, 
or change features to run in any environment without 
completely breaking an entire application.    The ideal 
scenario is that organization will create a storehouse of 
components that are built in-house, created by third-
parties, and shared with them from other organizations to 
use when building applications.    In this way, component 
code is recycled and nothing of value is lost or redundant.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 18

Apply components first to organic business processes e.g., 
accounting, sales—where their modular, independent 
nature is a good fit with these processes.    Then apply 
components to development—components give greater 
flexibility and productivity to developers that are 
building, integrating, maintaining, and delivering 
competitive-advantage applications in a ever-changing 
environment over the long term.

Choose a development tool that will allow teams of 
developers to build and assemble components, preferably 
based on a repository with team development capabilities 
built in.    Architect component applications with a 
distributed three-tier architecture in mind, keeping client 
applications, server-centric application services, and Web 
services separate.    It is imperative to develop all 
components and applications with the business problem 
at hand in mind at all times.    The main rationale of 
components is to create a solution that enhances the 
business process and does not simply recreate it. 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 19
Chapter Five
Supplier Abstracts
Borland International Inc. (Inprise Inc.)
100 Borland Way
Scotts Valley, CA.    95066
(800) 233-2444
www.borland.com
Market Position 
Effective in June 1998, Borland International Inc. will be changing 
the company’s name to Inprise, Inc. in order to forge a new identity 
for itself.  Inprise will focus more heavily on the middleware 
market, based on recent technology acquisitions.
Borland (Inprise) produces solid technology that is much admired 
and touted by developers, but -- unlike Microsoft -- has a hard time 
getting credibility in the enterprise.  Inprise’s JBuilder Java 
compiler is well regarded and was recently licensed by Oracle for 
use as the cornerstone of its own Java efforts.
Unfortunately, as Borland, the company has found it difficult to 
create a strong technical vision for the future, thus the change of 
name and product focus.  Through recent acquisitions, Borland has 
beefed its portfolio with enterprise-level technology, such as an 
Object Request Broker for communications.
Inprise has an embedded database, Interbase, as well as Delphi, 
JBuilder, and other developer environments.  Developers tend to 
use Inprise tools to build applications and then turn to Microsoft 
compilers for delivering production code.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Inprise delivers excellent technology, but the reputation of the 
company and its struggles to find a consistent message and 
marketing strategy to the enterprise will keep it a smaller player in 
this market.  There is long term viability for all of its development 
tools, however, and users should not be afraid to buy the 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 20
technology.  Borland will most likely continue as a solid deliverer 
of application development and compiler technology but will never 
again compete with Microsoft head-to-head.
Bluestone Software Inc. 
1000 Briggs Road
Mt. Laurel,    NJ    08054
(609) 727-4600
www.bluestone.com
Market Position
Bluestone’s Sapphire/Web Java database development environment 
has been well-received by application developers looking for the 
Swiss Army knife of Web development tools.    Now, however, the 
company faces an intense challenge as competition squeezes their 
market from all sides.    Newcomers are specializing in specific 
types of Internet applications, which makes it more difficult for 
developers to decide what tools to purchase.    Enterprise 
application vendors, such as SAP and PeopleSoft, are developing 
their own tools for use in extending and customizing their 
applications while application server and browser vendors are 
expanding their market with complimentary tools.    Database and 
current client-tools development environment suppliers are also 
entering their own solutions in the market.      All this has served to 
confuse Bluestone’s position.
Bluestone’s visual development environment remains a productive 
and useful tool for developing web-based applications.      Support 
for an application server and the ease of the development 
environment allows developers to write very sophisticated Internet 
applications.    The company should remain very viable as a 
competitor in the Internet tools development environment arena.    
However, it must increase or ,at minimum, maintain market share 
against a horde of rivals entering the fray.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Bluestone’s Sapphire development environment for the Internet is 
a very flexible and scalable solution that should help developers 
build very complex and data-intensive Internet applications.    
Sapphire/Web is on a par with any of the Internet tools 
development environments on the market today.    The company 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 21
should focus on greater visibility and a clear message of how and 
why to use the tool for building Web-based applications to 
eliminate confusion for customers.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 22
Computer Associates International Inc.
One Computer Associates Plaza
Islandia, NY      11788
(800) 225-5224
www.cai.com
Market Position
CA is a premier software supplier that delivers any number of 
development tools for platforms ranging from the mainframe to 
the PC.    Currently, the company is focusing Jasmine, an object-
oriented database and development environment, and Opal, a tool 
for revamping and enhancing legacy applications, along with its 
Unicenter TNG systems management software.    CA is moving all of 
its applications and development technologies closer together 
through the use of two key components — an object-oriented 
repository and a multimedia GUI authoring environment — that 
will unite these disparate products with a common set of 
capabilities.    This united strategy, called Harmony, when delivered 
in 1999, will increase the value of CA products when used together. 
Not to be overlooked are a wide variety of 3GL, 4GL, and client-
server development tools. 
CA’s focus is very clearly on the next generation of business 
solutions.    They are a formidable competitor in any market and 
usually sell application development tools bundled with solutions 
rather than as a separate purchase.
Aberdeen Conclusions 
CA is now creating an infrastructure for its products that should 
propel them forcefully forward.    The company’s object database 
development system and development environment should 
become very successful as an Internet development tool in the 
short term and as a overall information repository in the long 
term.    CA seems to have the vision, resources, and technology to 
continue to be a key player in the marketplace at large, but should 
aim to significantly beef up its mindshare in the development tools 
arena with Opal and Jasmine.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 23
Compuware Corporation
31440 Northwestern Highway
P.O. Box    9080
Farmington Hills, MI      48334
www.compuware.com
Market Position
Compuware recently acquired NuMega, which offers a suite of 
Windows debugging and performance profiling tools.    The 
acquisition, along with their current mainframe and legacy 
offerings, gives them a full complement of useful development 
tools.    Compuware also provides solutions for Year 2000 code 
remediation and a cross-platform, component-based development 
environment called UNIFACE.    The company is a key contender in 
large-systems development, cross-platform, and Unix development. 
With the new focus on components and the acquisition of NuMega 
tools, Compuware will become a more important presence in the 
Windows development arena. 
Compuware's marketing strategy emphasizes direct sales and high-
end applications.    It targets especially those Fortune-1000 
corporations that look to develop major applications.    With 
UNIFACE, Compuware sells into large organizations that are 
developing complex, business-critical systems with thousands of 
users.    Compuware offers extensive consulting and support from a 
professional services organization of more than 3,900 consultants 
and a network of Solution Partners to meet almost any 
development need.    For those preferring to outsource 
development, the Compuware consulting organization brings 23 
years of expertise in building complex business-critical solutions to 
bear in implementation and delivery of a project.    These services 
are available around the world from Compuware service 
providers.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Compuware’s new strategy for development of components and the 
emphasis on Windows development tools, via the NuMega acquisition, 
should help refresh its position in the market.    UNIFACE has long been 
a contender in the market but has needed a revamped approach to 
application development to    move forward as a serious contender in 
today’s component and Internet-obsessed marketplace.    If marketed 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 24
effectively, Compuware’s practical and useful approach to components 
and Windows development should win them fans.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 25
Forte Software Inc.
1800 Harrison Street      24th Floor
Oakland, CA.      94612
(510) 869-3400
www.forte.com
Market Position
Forte Software positions Forte as "an application development 
environment for high-end enterprise distributed computing" that 
allows IS "to rapidly build and easily evolve complex applications 
in today's complex environments".      The Forte Application 
Environment is an integrated set of object-oriented tools for 
building, deploying, and managing high-speed client-server 
applications by dividing applications into independent, 
interoperable chunks.
Forte Software emphasizes Forte's "environment independence" 
(ability to distribute and port applications across platforms, 
databases, GUIs, etc.), support for new application functionality 
(e.g., "business services"), ability to "hide development complexity", 
and deployment/main-tenance support (e.g., application 
partitioning).    Forte’s product line includes a workflow engine, 
Forte Conductor. Conductor is used to build high performance 
workflow-style applications that simplify complex business 
processes.
Users have moved to the Forte development environment when 
other client-server application development tools have not lived up 
to development demands or expectations.    Forte is beefing up its 
support for    Java on the server side and will enhance the visual 
development environment to allow users to create applications 
without programming.    Forte is especially focusing on technology 
to build reliable and scalable applications and to integrate 
disparate systems.
Aberdeen Conclusions 
Forte has become a very successful player catering to IT shops with 
development tools designed to create complex large scale 
applications, and appears to have weathered the market shift from 
client-server to Java in relatively good shape.    To continue to gain 
in prominence, Forte needs to continue to increase its support for 
Internet development and component-based development.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 26
IBM Corporation
Old Orchard Road
Armonk, NY.      10504
(800) 426-3333
www.ibm.com
Market Position
Besides a wide variety of application development tools available 
for large-scale systems, IBM also provides a suite of VisualAge 
development tools for almost every programming language and a 
bundle of tools for building electronic commerce applications.    
VisualAge for Java is one in a family of development environments 
providing a means to visually create applications from objects.    
The same VisualAge GUI environment is hosted on a range of 
languages:    VisualAge for SmallTalk, VisualAge for C++, VisualAge 
for COBOL, and VisualAge for Basic.    VisualAge for Java can also 
visually build applications from parts, using both visual and non-
visual elements.      Any object created in any language using 
VisualAge becomes a reusable object that another developer may 
pick up and use in his or her application.
IBM is now touting an application framework, called Network 
Computing Framework (NCF), that should provide an 
infrastructure to move developers    forward.    This approach is in 
much the same vein with Oracle’s Network Computing Architecture 
and CA’s Harmony, where each supplier is aiming to help users 
leverage    each company’s software    to best advantage.    These 
frameworks also act as an integration point for third-party 
applications.
Aberdeen Conclusion
IBM is a keen competitor and deliverer of application development 
tools in any market it which it chooses to compete.    However, in 
the past IBM’s development tools have been noted more for 
mainframe development support and less for delivery of such key 
Internet features as automated application deployment and 
component development.    To succeed, IBM needs to clearly 
demonstrate to IS buyers the relevance of VisualAge to E-commerce 
development.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 27
Intersolv Inc.
9420 Key West Avenue
Rockville, MD.      20850
(800) 547-4000
www.intersolv.com
Market Position
Intersolv’s Professional Version Control Software (PVCS) version 
control software is the undisputed market leader in its industry 
segment.    In fact, interest in version control, software 
configuration management, team development, and related 
development process software has increased as requirements for 
large-scale enterprise development projects for the Internet, 
distributed client-server environments, Intranets, and Java 
platforms have grown. Intersolv has also branched out to address 
Year 2000 services and database-to-Web-application access.    
Intersolv is currently focusing its resources on the development 
and marketing of data connectivity software and Year 2000 
consulting services in an attempt to broaden its market appeal and 
move away from a reliance on PVCS as its largest revenue 
generator.
Aberdeen Conclusion
Intersolv has delivered the type of work-horse products that any 
and every organization needs.    They are a relatively small 
company but have kept well-focused on business needs and cost 
considerations that are the realities of the market today.    Intersolv 
will do well with their Year 2000 services offering and as a result 
should end up with a broader installed base for PVCS.
Mercury Interactive Corporation
1325 Borregas Avenue 
Sunnyvale, CA.    94089
(408) 822-5200
www.merc-int.com
Market Position
The testing tool market is one of the major submarkets of 
application development and is growing rapidly, due to the 
complex nature of distributed applications that users are now 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 28
deploying, but also in large part because of the need to test 
applications that have been made Year 2000 compliant.    Mercury’s 
Mercury Testing Tools Suite provides a separate set of tools for 
automating the testing of Windows and Unix applications.    Load 
Runner provides an integrated client-server and Web load testing 
tool that supports hundreds or thousands of virtual users and 
exercises the application as if it were in a production environment 
to provide an accurate view of system behavior and performance. 
WinRunner is the client-server Windows GUI test tool.    XRunner 
offers a toolset for GUI test automation with a Visual Testing 
environment and interactive debugging across all Unix platforms. 
TestDirector is a scalable and collaborative test management 
system for executing tests and maintain quality control.    
TestDirector includes test execution, defect tracking, test analysis 
and test planning on the front end of the project.
Mercury is one of the largest and most successful of the suppliers 
that deliver testing solutions to the developer.    Rational Software 
recently acquired a key competitor, SQA Inc. and SQA Suite, who 
focused only on Windows testing.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Mercury will continue its predominance in the market as a 
supplier of mixed-platforms testing solutions.    Key to its continued 
growth will be the success of its attempt to bring stress testing to 
Web-based development.    Mercury’s products are solid and have 
been well-received in the market as standalone products; however, 
better integration between the products and a common repository 
would bring some finesse to the tools suite. 
Microsoft Corp.
One Microsoft way
Redmond, Washington 98052
(800) 426 9400
www.microsoft.com
Market Position
Microsoft enjoys a premier spot in the pantheon of application 
development tools suppliers, with the largest number of 
programmers currently using its tools and a host of third-party ISV 
applications available for use with Microsoft tools. Microsoft’s tools 
run the gamut from the Microsoft repository to Visual Basic, Visual 
C++, and Visual J++ integrated development environments and 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 29
Windows operating system SDKs.    Corporate developers are 
moving to Windows NT as the choice of a development 
environment, regardless of the target platform on which it will be 
deployed.    This adds significant credence to Microsoft’s role as an 
application development tools supplier.
Microsoft tends to chart its own course when it comes to 
supporting and nurturing industry standards.    First and foremost 
Microsoft tools support Windows platforms and Microsoft relies on 
partners to port key technologies, such as the Microsoft Repository 
and COM to other platforms.    Likewise, developers tend to have a 
love-hate relationship with Microsoft, since Microsoft tools tend to 
focus on supporting Microsoft’s overall plan for Windows and not 
necessarily the developer’s ease-of-use.    Microsoft has also been 
known to incorporate technology into Windows that makes third-
party software obsolete.    Overall however, most developer strain 
to maintain a close relationship in order to tap into the enormous 
Windows market.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Microsoft is and will continue to be a key contender in the 
application development marketplace.    Their main challenge in 
the next 1-2 years will be to upgrade their present development 
toolsets to deliver more application scalability and robustness, and 
especially in NT and Internet environments.
NetDynamics Inc.
185 Constitution Drive
Menlo Park, CA.    94025
(650) 462-7600
www.netdynamics.com
Market Position
NetDynamics is one of the Internet application development and 
deployment environment suppliers that is currently getting 
squeezed from all sides by others, such as database suppliers, 
enterprise application vendors, and application server suppliers.    
The value proposition that NetDynamics brings to users is that it 
has focused on achieving an architecture that bypasses or upgrades 
the Web browser and server using TP monitor scalability 
techniques.    This differentiates NetDynamics from most suppliers 
in either the Internet-only toolset or middleware markets.    
NetDynamics incorporates mechanisms vital to scaling Internet 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 30
applications in the way that past high-end enterprise applications 
have been scaled — with load balancing across database servers, 
scheduling and queuing.    For example, the NetDynamics 
Application Server is based on a distributed architecture that 
provides automatic load balancing.
NetDynamics Studio is a Java development environment that 
automates the delivery of Web applications through the use of 
wizards that generate an application framework.    NetDynamics 
Studio provides automatic formatting and validation of data. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
NetDynamics has several hurdles to overcome, one being a 
reputation for being not being able to scale with the requisite 
performance.    The company has worked diligently to alleviate 
difficulties, but still faces this impression from technology buyers. 
Focusing steadily on deployment of Internet applications has won 
them fans, but as users get more sophisticated NetDynamics will 
have to move into development overdrive to keep up with user 
demands.    They also face the same dilemma as Bluestone in 
differentiating themselves with a powerful enough value 
proposition or solution proposal to gather a following.    The 
company has many well-known corporate customers to its credit.
Oracle Corp.
500 Oracle Parkway
Redwood Shores, CA 944
(650 ) 506-7000
www.oracle.com
Market Position
Oracle is a supplier of development tools that are primarily used 
with its database technology.    Most users purchase the 
development tools if they also have the database.    Oracle has also 
had a reputation for delivering lots of good functionality in a 
package that is difficult to use.    In forthcoming releases of its 
product Oracle hopes to overturn this perception; however it will 
take much time and delivery of products to convince the developer 
community.
Oracle’s Developer/2000 may well be the application development 
environment with the widest range of scalable application 
development capabilities available today.    While primarily 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 31
targeted toward medium to large scale, data-intensive, mission-
critical client/server applications running on departmental or 
enterprise systems, Developer/2000 is also effective for application 
development down to the workgroup level and across the World 
Wide Web.    It is closely integrated with Oracle’s Designer/2000 
application modeling and code generation tool, which is today’s 
premier example of a data-focused design toolset with long 
experience in large-scale application-design efforts. 
Developer/2000 and Designer/2000 are a strategic component of 
Oracle’s Network Computing Architec-ture (NCA) for building data-
intensive, mission-critical    applications.    The NCA takes a 
component approach to merging    existing Oracle products that 
support client-server, the Internet, and distributed objects with 
new features through the use of component "cartridges".    Client, 
application server, and database server cartridges, along with 
services, increase programmer productivity by embedding much of 
the specific low-level details of programming for multitier client-
server, Internet, and distributed object environments in 
infrastructure code. 
Aberdeen Conclusion 
Oracle is in a position of strength, with the largest installed base 
and a highly flexible Developer/2000 environment.    Oracle has a 
larger sales force than its competitors, and extensive service and 
support capabilities.    Oracle’s future challenges lie especially in 
providing improved ease of use for departmental developers and 
further support for distributed objects. 
Progress Software Corporation
14 Oak Park 
Bedford, MA    01730
Tel:    (617) 280-4000
Internet:    www.progress.com
Market Position
Progress has long experience in database and development-tool 
technology, and through the acquisition of Apptivity Corp. has 
managed to revamp its tools offerings with Java.    Apptivity, a 
multi-tier Java development tool from Progress Software, is 
establishing itself as a strategic tool for rapidly delivering thin-
client Java based business applications that can be deployed on an 
Internet/Intranet.    Technology buyers should keep in mind that 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 32
Apptivity can deliver three important features required by Internet 
applications:    minimal maintenance; collaborative capabilities; 
and multi-tier distributed network support.    Apptivity generates 
Java code and therefore provides a rich set of benefits that 
developers can gain with Java, such as cross-platform deployment 
and the ability to run a thin client within a browser.
A notable characteristic of Apptivity is that it allows deployment of 
Java server-side logic on the Apptivity application server.    This 
application architecture can dramatically improve application 
performance, simplify maintenance, and reduce application 
development and deployment costs by relying on thin clients, 
reduced network traffic, and the ability to support server-side 
processing.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Progress faces all the difficulties of other development tools 
suppliers in providing Internet development and deployment tools, 
but has a strong position in that it has many years of development 
expertise to rely upon.    It is also viewed as less proprietary than 
the larger database suppliers who also offer development tools.
Rational Software Corporation
18880 Homestead Road
Cupertino, CA.    95014
(800) 728-1212
www.rational.com
Market Position
Rational has been through several years of rapid acquisitions in 
which they have a amassed a broad pool of application 
development process and testing tools.    Although the company is 
just now beginning to outline its plans for integration between the 
various product sets, it is encouraging to see the plans begin to gel, 
especially after the chaos of the acquisitions themselves.    Rational 
has identified five key areas of focus in which it will deliver 
products:    requirement management, visual modeling, software 
quality and testing, software configuration management, and 
project automation. 
Pure/Atria and SQA were among the buyouts.    Thus, Rational not 
only provides the market leading application modeling and design 
tool with Rational Rose, but also delivers key Windows application 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 33
testing and development process management capabilities.    
Among the process management features are requirements 
management (RequisitePro) and change request management 
(ClearQuest). 
Microsoft’s Visual Modeler, which is included in the Visual Studio 
and Visual Basic, is a subset of Rational Rose.    This close 
relationship with Microsoft could turn out to be a very strategic 
move for Rational. The company has been a big proponent of the 
UML specification and will be porting the    Microsoft Repository to 
non-Microsoft platforms.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Rational has a lot of products that need to be integrated together 
and must come up with a consistent and coherent marketing 
strategy.      The relationship Rational enjoys with Microsoft should 
give them enhanced credibility in the developer tools market. 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 34
Sybase Inc. 
6475 Christie Avenue
Emeryville, CA.      94608
(800) 779-2273
www.sybase.com
Market Position
The Powersoft Division of Sybase is one of the pioneers of the 
client-server application development environment.    Currently the 
company is undergoing a transition as it releases Java and Internet 
development tools that it hopes will be as innovative as those of its 
former development offerings.    It is also revamping the 
PowerBuilder tool to support more modular development.    Of all 
the database suppliers, Sybase’s tools are the least tied to the 
database, due to Powersoft’s origin as a separate company.    The 
division also includes the PowerDesigner modeling tool, a 
transaction processing engine, and compiler technology for Java, C 
and C++.    For example, Power++, a C++ compiler and integrated 
development environment, allows distributed application 
development via the Powersoft Jaguar CTS and Microsoft 
Transaction Server middleware. 
Aberdeen Conclusions
Sybase’s recent financial difficulties obscure a broad development 
product suite with exceptionally loyal customers.    Sybase’s main 
challenge will therefore be to reassure its customers that Sybase is 
in development for the long haul, and that Sybase can continue to 
match the rapid pace of technology in the Internet-development 
market.
Symantec Corporation 
10201 Torre Avenue
Cupertino, CA.    95014
(800) 441-7234
www.symantec.com
Market Position
Symantec is probably best known for its desktop utilities, but it has 
long been a solid player in the development compiler and 
languages market.    Currently, Symantec has a premier place as one 
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 35
of the top three suppliers of a fast Java compiler for the Windows 
market.    One of the first tools to market to support Java, Visual 
Cafe Pro is the RAD version of the Symantec tool for developing 
Java applets and applications that connect to databases. It 
combines the earlier Visual Café 3GL compile and debugging 
approach with RAD-like component-based programming.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Java development is clearly a strong niche market in which 
Symantec will remain a leader.    Symantec’s main challenge will be 
to continue to differentiate itself from Microsoft as a supplier of 
high-performance and higher-end tools.
SunSoft, Inc. (a subsidiary of Sun Microsystems, Inc.)
2550 Garcia Avenue
Mountain View, CA.    94043
(800) 786-7638
www.sun.com/sunsoft
Market Position
SunSoft is the software subsidiary of Sun Microsystems.    SunSoft is the 
owner of the trademark and developer of the Java language, giving them 
immense credibility in the market.    They are primarily developers of 
compilers and development technology for Unix developers in general 
and Solaris in particular.
Visual Workshop for C++ is an integrated RAD tool for Solaris.    Visual 
Workshop includes a visualization tool for dropping information into a 
three-dimensional display that can be rotated and magnified.    The 
integrated development environment includes a visual GUI Builder that 
allows developers to test GUIs and capture Motif clients for modifications 
or re-engineering. 
Java Workshop is a RAD development tool written almost entirely in 
HTML and Java that allows developers to add dynamic interactive Java 
applets to Web pages and build standalone Java applications that run on 
top of the Java Virtual machine.    It runs inside a browser-like 
environment derived from Sun’s HotJava Web browser.    Workshop 
contains a Web Browser user interface, an integrated toolset for 
development, and a set of Web publishing tools.
Development Tools Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 36
Aberdeen Conclusions
SunSoft will continue to maintain a position of power in the market 
as Java becomes a popular language, but will need to solidify a 
position through partnerships in the Windows marketplace.    
Microsoft’s competing object model and ActiveX technology will 
remain a major competitor.    Recent announcements from database 
suppliers have indicated that they will incorporate the Java Virtual 
Machine in the database, allowing developers to write Java code to 
run across databases.    This shows the growing importance of Java 
to corporate developers, and thus market stature for SunSoft.
