
===== Tandem-TopGun-ET1-1987-08-PSK-DECtp.txt =====
I've spent a lot of time looking at the details of Tandem's NonStop SQL
debit credit benchmark, which they called TopGun, and have come to the
conclusion that:

        o They used every trick they could (but that's benchmarking!)
        o The tricks they used are not necessarily applicable in the 'real
          world'
        o Tandem's Debit Credit is about four times easier than the Digital
          Debit Credit guidelines I've seen
        o Digital has a marketing challenge in that our conservative Debit
          Credit should not be directly compared to Tandem's
        o Using the same tricks Tandem did, I believe we can achieve very
          competitive costs/tps and COO/tps, and that we should do such
          testing in order to allow the sales force to compare apples to
          apples for the customer (before moving on to more realistic measures
          of likely customer-environment performance)
        o The Digital spring product offensive will likely make us much
          more competitive with Tandem

Without running debit credit on Tandem (yet), we can't accurately assess
what a Tandem would do running a conservative debit credit. However, we
can look at several of their 'go fast' tricks and make a reasoned assessment
of what that trick bought them.

I'd like comments on the following arguments and numbers from those of you
familiar with Tandem, TopGun, or Digital debit credit.

Because Tandem 'clustered' multiple systems, I'll use a single
8-processor VLX configuration for these arguments because it scales to standard
Digital configurations without getting into lot's of cluster performance
arguments. Tandem used four identical 8-processor systems to generate the
208 tps numbers quoted in the press.

Baseline:
        8 VLX processors (at 3 mips and 8MB each)
        20 disks at 128MB each (they wanted heads) includes 90 day history
        tps based on mirrored disks; costs based on mostly unmirrored
        1 56KB X.25 line to each processor
        each processor had its own set of branch/teller/account files
        tps (90%-2 seconds) = 58
        5 year COO (discounted maintenance cash flow)    $2,995,000
        COO/tps         $51.6K

        Source:   Tandem publication #84160, TopGun Benchmark Workbook


Restating the Baseline for Conservative Debit Credit

1. Performance at 95%-l second response time (end-to-end, measured at driver
system [which is overly conservative]) drops about 50% based on extrapolation
from the data points provided in Tandem's TopGun report. Tandem claims
180-200 milliseconds in the response time is due to the network, driver X.25
process, and driver system dispatching overhead.

I feel very comfortable in downgrading by 50% on this issue.

2. Tandem did NO presentation services, arguing that this was done by an
(uncosted) intelligent controller at the branch. This argument has some
real world weight, but deviates from the debit credit definition.
Because Tandem's Pathway product uses INTERPRETED COBOL, then ANY presentation
services get expensive quickly. The cost of mapping 30 fields per transaction
is, I estimate, worth from 20% to 50%.  I know our own testing shows that
presentation services in TDMS contributes substantially to making debit
credit CPU-bound.                                                              ■
3. Tandem, by using the 'intelligent controller at the branch' argument,
 simulated only 1000 active tellers for 1000 branches, not the 10,000 called
for. Doing so eliminated the possibility of branch record contention, and
saved memory and virtual circuits. Worth maybe 5%-10%.

4. Every processor had its own comm line to local disk account/branch/teller
files (ABT files). 'Not on us' transactions were routed to the proper
processor. Tandem gained considerably by partitioning the workload VERY
evenly across the available processors, scaling the database at 8
tps/processor. This resulted in an overscaled database (8 processors x
4 systems x 8 tps/processor = 256 tps...they only got 208 tps).

Digital (and any other vendor) could do similar partitioning, so I don't
consider this a trick. However, not all (not many!) customer applications
lend themselves to the symmetric partitioning Tandem did.

If Tandem had to use central, single ABT databases, then they would hit
the wall on disk process throughput or some such software limitation. They
would need much less hardware, but they'd get much less work done too.

HPS debit credit testing this spring should shed some light on the cost/value
of partitioning.

Let's assume for this memo that partitioning is an accepted debit credit
practice. Tandem can use it with no penalty. We can use it too.
5. Tandem gets the same throughput with SQL as with their file system.
 Sounds competitively bad.  In fact, Tandem used proprietary extensions
to SQL and accessed the teller and branch files by relative record key.
Relative access, of course, is a very fast access method.
Tandem made some claims about doing the account balance update in SQL in
the disk process itself, a nice feat.   However, NonStop SQL can only do
this with single column updates. This means applications that have to update
multiple rows will have a longer code path.

Lastly, Tandem treated the ABT database as files. There were no (expensive)
JOINS or other SQL constructs used. To Tandem's credit, SQL is not/by debit
credit. My point is that just because Tandem used NS SQL, we should not
immediately counter with Rdb when RMS might do the job. On the other hand,
as I conclude below, we may be in better shape than many people think...which
is the point of this exercise.

6.   Tandem used and costed   mirrored disks.   Worth maybe   5% to throughput.


Conclusion
A conservative approach to Debit Credit, s/ich as the approach Digital uses
for Debit Credit, when applied to Tandem will lead to considerably reduced
Tandem throughput. My estimate is 10-15'tps on the baseline described above.

I have no doubt that we can perform today in the 10-15 tps range, if not
with one machine, then with a small cluster. New products this year will
push us to even higher levels.

Using Tandem's TopGun methodology and definition of debit credit in a Digital
debit credit should result in competitive performance and very competitive
COO/tps. Partitioning, branch MicroVAXes for presentation services, etc.
work just as well in our favor as they did for Tandem.  In fact, I think
we should put some SMP machines together and generate some 100+ tps numbers
if only to say, yeah, we can do that too.

So, Tandem is not as awesomely good as first appears. And Digital is not
nearly as bad as corporate mythology would have us believe,             --- —
Peter Kastner
Corporate Systems Group
13 January 1988
                                           MEMO
To:
Bill Elliott
Bill Foster
Bill McBride
Bill Thompson
Bob Freiburghouse
Gary Okimoto
Greg Baryza
John Curtis
John Howard
Larry Sherman
Mike Grady
Paul Tucker
Raphael Frommer
Rob Larson
Scott Mitchell


From:      Peter Kastner

August 11,1987

Subject:          Tandem’s NonStop SQL Tests -- the TopGun Benchmark

Attached is a preliminary analysis of the ET-1 benchmark report recently released by Tandem on
their massive, 32 VLX processor test of NonStop SQL. The report totals some 580 pages and
includes numerous source code listings and detailed benchmark timing results.

The conclusions of Clark Hodder, Raphael Frommer and myself are that a comparable response
by Stratus which can pass competitive scrutiny will require five or more man-years of effort by
some of Stratus’s best people plus the costs of an outside auditor.

We have a number of options in response to Tandem’s efforts, including:

        o         Using their report as a cookbook to do a similar test
        o         Ignoring their tests and continuing with our current version
        o         Raising the stakes by doing a 'more compliant’ test than they did
        o         Deemphasizing ET-1 as a meaningless test of real-world applications (and SQL)
        o         Devising our own, new OLTP benchmark standard
        o         Embracing another OLTP standard such as RAMP-C (when it is defined)

My conclusion is we will have to do something, some day, to respond to Tandem. Now that we
know what Tandem actually did and how they did it, we can begin to assess our response.

Peter Kastner
        Working Document on the NonStop SQL Benchmark
       Tandem Publication #84160

       Author:             Raphael Frommer       with comments and Observations by Clark Hodder and
                           Peter Kastner August, 1987

       Why did Tandem run this benchmark?

       A section of the Workbook is a set of overheads describing the history and results of the so-called
       Top Gun benchmark. In it, Tandem claims its motives for running the benchmark were to
       demonstrate that NonStop SQL:

       []        works
       []        is distributed
       []        injects no performance penalty
       [j        provides linear growth
       [I        is scaleable from EXT to VLX systems
       []        provides good price/performance
       0         has no limit on performance

       While no direct or indirect statements about competitors are made, the name of the benchmark,
       Top Gun, says it all.


        General notes:

        1.       The Account table was partitioned 33 ways (across 32 VLX cpus plus one EXT system),
        using NonStop SQL's CREATE TABLE syntax. The Branch and Teller files were partitioned in a
        similar way. Unlike NonStop SQL, ENSCRIBE does present a practical limit to the maximum
        number of partitions (16), so the ENSCRIBE database and ENSCRIBE benchmark was
        limited to 16 VLX processors.

        2.     The auditor (Tom Sawyer, from Codd & Date Consulting Group) confirmed linear
        expandability, but only within 10% for the largest configuration:

                                                            16-cpu           32-cpu
                 Predicted (from 8-cpu run)                 116              232
                 Actual                                     106              208
                 Divergence                                 8%               10%
                 Inter-node xactions:                       7.5%             11%

        Note: The inter-node transactions were those inter-branch transactions (the specification
        demands that these constitute 15% of the activity) that wound up traversing a fiber optic or 9.6KB
        EXPAND link.

        3.      In the included paper by Anon Et Al (A Benchmark of Tandem's NonStop SQL
        Demonstrating Over 200 Transactions Per Second), on page 20 there is the admission that the
        increased cost of network-distributed transactions causes growth to be .9x linear rather than 1x.

        This is interesting in light of the fact that IBM gives the System/88 credit for being linear, but only
        at some fraction of unity. The last time I heard a number, it also was 90%. So now we have
        Tandem agreeing that it’s OK to be linear at a slope other than unityl




1   Stratus Confidential              Working Document                                    August 11,1987
       4.      Each VLX cpu got its own 56KB line; the EXT-10 2-cpu system got one line. Four bit
       sync controllers per 8-cpu VLX system were used, so each controller handled two lines. In the
       old days, this would imply the two io processes would run in a single cpu. But nowadays it may
       be possible to split ownership of a controller, thus smoothing the comm load out across
       the 8 cpus.

       What makes this more interesting still is the Mackie diagram provided, which seems to show two
       bit sync controllers (4 lines) strapped between cpus 2 and 3, and two bit sync controllers (4 lines)
       strapped between cpus 6 and 7. This seems to prove conclusively that maximally 4 cpus got
       directly involved in X.25 communications. At a minimum, it would seem that a VLX cpu handled
       two 56KB X.25 lines.

       The Mackie diagram implies no spare bitsync comm controllers. In the event of a comm failure,
       two lines (160 branches/1600 tellers) are lost.


       5.     Although each VLX cpu had to handle 80 branches (800 tellers total), the transactions
       came in on one X.25 line. Each VLX got 2.5 PATHWAY TCPs, on average, to accomplish this.
       TCP code and data came to about .5MB/VLX cpu. Twenty NonSTop SQL servers on a VLX
       consumed about 0.5MB.

       6.      Tandem originally estimated a VLX could do 8TPS, so they scaled their database
       accordingly. A mirrored disk per VLX cpu stored:

                           80 branches           8KB
                           800 tellers           80KB
                           800,000 accounts      80MB

               And they fit these on Tandem’s smallest (V8-class) disk. A1.6 MB disk cache per
       mirrored disk partition was sufficient to keep all branches, tellers and the account index pages
       resident in main memory.

       Tandem claims to have oversized the data base to handle 256 tps.

       7.      TMF did group commits. On average, one audit flush was done per 5 commits. Because
       the audit trail was duplexed, this amounts to .4 physical writes to the audit trail per ET-1.

       8.     SQL’s higher performance is attributed to slightly fewer cpu instructions than ENSCRIBE
       and reduced message flow. In updating the account table, NonStop SQL "sends half as many
       messages and one quarter the number of message bytes".

        9.       A graph of cpu busy/transaction seems to confirm Tandem’s claim that NS SQL is less
        costly than ENSCRIBE: Discprocess busy/ET-1 was 24.5 ms in the NS SQL version versus 28.7
        ms in the ENSCRIBE version. Curiously, the difference, 4.2 ms, is eaten up by the reduced
        efficiency of the COBOL server (the ENSCRIBE COBOL server consumed 4.5 ms less than the
        COBOL 85 SQL server). Most interesting is the fact that the NonStop SQL implementation, per
        the suggestion of the auditor, was augmented to check for overdrafts. The ENSCRIBE version,
        coded in late 1986 by Praful Shah, apparently did not.

        10.     The history file was composed of 4KB blocks, and required two I/Os for
        every 80 transactions. At 64TPS this is about 1.25 I/Os per second.




2   Stratus Confidential              Working Document                                 August 11,1987
       11.    Page 6.8 gives us the 90-day history file requirement. Page 4.4 defines 1 tps of history at
       2.59MB based on 24 hour/7 day operations at 1 /3rd of peak rate. Sounds good enough to
       emulate their definition.

       12.      Page 6.7 in the Top Gun Sizing section includes the very significant statement: "The
       autorestart option will be for TCPs, so no backup TCP or checkpointing to the backup TCP will be
       required. Additionally IDS support will be used for the terminals." This means that the
       implementation was not as fault tolerant as Tandem could have made it. In fact, a processor
       failure would cause a new TCP to be started on an alternate CPU, and 'terminals’ would get a
       login message. Further, tellers would not know what transactions had posted or not, so inquiries
       would be needed to see what had to be reentered or not. Use of autorestart and IDS reinforce our
       claim that PATHWAY TCPs and SCOBOL are expensive and that, for best performance, their
       involvement must be limited to the bare minimum. Our attention should be focussed on how to
       take advantage of Tandem’s lack of requester code and fault tolerance.

       On the same page, there is an inference that one VLX system has no difficulty supporting 640
       concurrent X.25 circuits.

       13.      Pricing:

       5 year life cycle VLX costs in the $43K/TPS price range is only possible if database disks are
       unmirrored and the 90 day history file is omitted. Their "compliance plus" prices jump to
       $56K/TPS, and provide dual data paths to 90 days of (assumed duplexed) history, duplexed
       database and Audittrail disks.

       Computing Net Present Value on maintenance cash flows at a 15% discount rate clearly helps
       their life cycle costs.

       14.      Tandem used inter-arrival rates as a means of governing the exponential distribution of
       transactions. They implemented it in a way that forced reality from theory, because new
       transactions were not started until old ones came back to the driver and it was discovered that it
       was already late to dispatch another transaction. Hodder believes (and Kastner agrees) that
       using an exponential distribution of teller think times is not only more ’real world’, but free of
       discrepancy between theory and reality.

       15.      The simulator reports clearly show that a 15 minute measurement window under steady
       state conditions was chosen from a 40 minute test period. Thus, it’s OK to throw out the costs of
       test startup.

       Things that made life easier for Tandem:

        1.       "Terminals" were driven in record mode using PATHWAY’S Intelligent Device Support.
        Presentation services were assumed to be done in the terminal, which Tandem assumes would
        be ATMs in any modem day implementation. Clearly, Tandem made the leanest possible server
        in order to minimize the amount of interpreted SCOBOL code.

        2.       A concentrator at each branch was assumed to handle the 10 "terminals" there. This had
        the effect of reducing the number of sessions by a factor of 10 for the same transaction rate when
        compared to the standard. This is arguably 'real world', but we could use a circuit per teller if we
        wanted to. Our choice.

        3.     Response time was relaxed to 90%-ile 2 second response time (but recall that response
        time was measured at the driver system, thus adding in its X.25 overhead as well).




3   Stratus Confidential             Working Document                                  August 11,1987
       Tandem failed to live up to its promise of disclosing 95%-ile 1 second response times (see page
       6.11), the ET-1 ’standard’. Analysis of Tandem’s published response times and throughput from
        143 tps to 229 tps shows 95%ile-1 second response times ranging from 1.3 to 5.1 seconds.
       Extrapolation from these data show a 32 processor system running about 100 tps at 95%ile-1
       second (measured the very conservative but practical way Tandem measured response times).
       We should carefully examine the opportunites to do our tests at 95%-1 second and hold Tandem
       to the same standard, or see what advantages we get going to 90%-2 seconds.

       4.       Teller and branch updates employed a WHERE clause that used the SYSKEY feature of
       NonStop SQL. 'This field is not a data value in the row; it is the relative record number - in effect
       a direct reference." This departure from ANSI Standard SQL was cited by the auditor as
       "removing the access transparency normally gained by SQL". It also keeps the code from being
       portable.

       5.      The auditor stated that "the history database did not have physical disks allocated to
       cover the ninety day requirement. This is a minor matter since this database is updated at the
       end. The priced configuration should have the correct amount of disk included." Indeed Tandem
       wound up furnishing several sets of prices, with and without history disks.

       6. The configurations are not fault tolerant (comm) and turning off TCP checkpointing saved
       them a lot of overhead. Tandem declined the auditor's suggestion (page 5.1) that various
       hardware failures be tested during the measurement cycle. We definitely should maintain our
       moral 'high ground’ by running tests with fully duplexed hardware and assessing failures under
       load. This is one of our few uniquenesses.

       7. Page 4.24 says ’NonStop SQL subcontracts single variable queries to remote servers'. This
       implies that multi-variable and (surely) multi-file queries are more expensive than the minimal
       efforts Tandem took.

       Things that made life harder for Tandem:

       1.      SQL had the discprocess check that debits did not cause account balances
       to become negative. In a non-SQL environment, this is a trivial test. One Stratus avenue of
       approach is to add code to the server to turn the transaction into a more meaningful Demand
       Deposit Accounting application. We could develop code which uses all three files (which would
       require much more expensive SQL 'joins’ than the approach Tandem took) with code that does
       something like:

                IF ACCOUNT-TYPE = COMMERCIAL THEN
                      ADD TRANSACTION-AMOUNT TO TELLER-COMMERCIAL-TOTALS
                      ADD TRANSACTION-AMOUNT TO BRANCH-COMMERCIAL-TOTALS
                ELSE
                      ADD TRANSACTION-AMOUNT TO TELLER-PERSONAL-TOTALS
                      ADD TRANSACTION-AMOUNT TO BRANCH-PERSONAL-TOTALS.

        We have to decide whether SQL is a benefit to Debitcredit or whether the abilities of Stratus SQL
        (when announced) is best shown on VOS file system files.

       2.       The system was measured over ten minute periods and the average for each period was
       used to compute the response time curves and consequent TPS ratings. However, analysis of
       the driver code indicates they started the test by flooding the system with transactions. Perhaps
       a better way is to start off with random arrivals, which builds more slowly but avoids the deep pit
       that's dug when the system is initially flooded.




4   Stratus Confidential             Working Document                                  August 11,1987
       3.      Response times included X.25 overhead within the driver system. Tandem estimates this
       added 150 to 180 ms to the reported response time. On the whole, this is OK at 2 second
       response times but very costly if we are using 95%iie-1 second timing. One alternative is to
       timestamp transactions in the requester just before they are handed off to X.25, and stamping
       again when the driver application gets the transaction. Dividing the difference in times in half gets
       us the average of one X.25 cost plus half the line transmission overhead. That is still more
       rigorous than the ET-1 ’standard’ which measures last bit in to first bit out of the driven module.

       4.      All disks, not just the logs, were duplexed. In the benchmark, only one disc was
       configured for the History table, but in pricing the system the 90-day history file of each node was
       sized at 6.7GB [There is a claim that this would fit on 14 mirrored volumes, but my calculations
       show these 13.4 physical gigabytes would require 16 volumes, or 2 XL-8 disk
       subsystems.]

       5.      The message interarrival rate was not uniform, but instead exponential, with an average
       of 10 seconds per branch. The auditor admitted this technique is the most difficult for OLTP
       system to accommodate. See comment 14 above.

       Puzzlements

       1.      In several places within the workbook, the EXT-10 2-cpu system was claimed to be less
       powerful than a single VLX cpu. But Tandem’s publicly released numbers for both processor
       types contradict this. An EXT-10 ought to be capable of 4 ET-1/sec, while a single VLX cpu
       should do 6.25. 4 is certainly not less than half of 6.25.

       2.      Why were 8-cpu systems, not 16-cpu systems configured? Is this confirmation of a
       (counter-intuitive) rumor that it’s better to FOX-linktwo 8-cpu systems versus using one 16-cpu
       VLX?

       3.        Tandem used V-8 (128MB) disks for the tests, then factored in a huge number of XL8
       (400MB) disks to hold the history. Was this just sloppy summarization? They might have been
       able to reconfigure the disks to partition the active files over a bunch of XL8’s that also contained
       lots of inactive history storage. When we lay out our benchmark we should carefully decide on
       the best mix of disk size vs number of disks. Also, it wouldn't hurt to actually have the history
       file(s) exist...Tandem played a little loose here.

       4.       Page 6.1 and subsequent pages in the benchmark sizing section are headed TG .3KTPS
       Benchmark’. TG means Top Gun. ’.3KTPS’means 300 tps to Kastner. Did Tandem originally
       expect to get 300 tps from this system? Based on the 1986 VLX announcement at 40 tps for 4
       cpu’s, I believe 30* 10 = 300 tps was the expected throughput level. This means Tandem is now
       working on any bottlenecks they discovered and we can expect them to raise the performance
       levels over time with software improvements.

        Hodder’s Observations on the Topgun Benchmark Report
              (with comments by Kastner)


        Tandem’s Topgun benchmark demonstrated over 200 ET1 transactions per second. This report
        is very significant in several ways:

        * Resources

        Tandem devoted a considerable set of resources to this benchmark. The testbed consisted of $8
        Million worth of hardware dedicated for almost two months. The total project spanned at least




5   Stratus Confidential             Working Document                                  August 11,1987
        seven months. The personnel involved were most of their very top performance, data base, and
        competitive people. I would estimate that they spent at least 5 man years on this project. Some
        of the specific people involved were:

           Frank Clugage Cupertino DBMS Product Marketing Manager
           Jim Gray    Cupertino DBMS Guru, Technical Lead ?
           Jim Enright Cupertino Performance Expert
           Nhan Chu     Cupertino Queueing Theory Expert (Wrote Driver)
           Praful Shah Cupertino Stratus Competitive Expert
                                      Wrote Enscribe server code
           Harald Sammer Frankfurt High Performance Research Center Mgr.
           Gerhard Huff Frankfurt HPRC
           TLW (?)     Frankfurt HPRC (Wrote B’mark code)
           Tom Sawyer Codd & Date Auditor


        * Full Disclosure

       Tandem has established a level of disclosure that must now be respected by any vendor in the
       future. They have completely redefined the playing field. The report includes:

           Auditor’s Report
           Benchmark Source Code
           Driver Source Code
           Database Layout
           Pricing Information for Cost/Tx
           Detailed Response Time Histograms

        It will be difficult for other vendors to claim ET1 numbers without similar backup materials. Full
        disclosure also implies a much more precise compliance with the ET1 standard itself, with any
        deviations explicitly noted. It means that a substantial amount of effort must be spent cleaning up
        code and formatting results. An auditor will probably be required. Tom Sawyer appears to have
        done quite a lot of work in the Topgun report. There are numerous changes in the benchmark
        code and in the driver per his requests.


        * NewETI Definition

        Topgun establishes a new defacto ET1 standard. They have made some changes to the original
        ET1 definition, and have defined some areas that were not well defined before. Specifically:

        A. Transaction Protection is required. They have not released any unprotected numbers at all. I
        do not see any good way that we can put unprotected numbers up against their protected
        numbers. Any prospect exposed to the Tandem Topgun slides will be expecting TP protected
        numbers. We can’t really argue with this. The original ET1 strongly implied TP was required, but
        Tandem left us a window by announcing old ET1 numbers with and without.

        B. The 90 Day History File is now defined to be 2,590,000 records per TPS. (An 8 hour day
        would be 3600 * 8 * 90 = 2,592,000.) We may as well use this number. It is good to have an
        agreed upon size.

        C. The number of active tellers is reduced to one per branch, instead of ten per branch. This is a
        nontrivial change. It means that there is virtually no possibilty of record lock contention any more.
        (The old benchmark had ten tellers contending for one branch record. This gave




6   Stratus Confidential             Working Document                                  August 11,1987
        us problems under our old TP scheme.) It greatly reduces the memory requirements of the
        benchmark, there are 1/10 as many virtual circuits, requestor threads, etc. It does greatly simplify
        setting up a large benchmark. Since our memory is not cheap, I would go along with this
        change as well.

       D. The transaction arrival pattern should be random. This is a good change in the direction of
       realism. The original ET1 merely specified that the transactions came from each teller at 100
       second intervals. This gave unrealistically low response times. Topgun attempted to randomize
       the arrival time between transactions. This is not quite satisfactory since some interarrival times
       will be less than the response time. (e.g. a particular transaction completes in say, three
       seconds. I roll my random dice and decide to send the next transaction two seconds after
       the last one started. This is impossible, since it implies that I start the next transaction one
       second ago.) In these cases Topgun simply sends the next transaction immediately. This is not
       really correct. If they truly want an exponentially distributed interarrival time, they should
       send the next transaction immediately, and give it a starting timestamp of one second earlier.
       That one second should count against the response time, and should be used in the following
       calculation for dispatching the next transaction. If they had done this correctly, their response
       times would have been even worse than they were. And they were pretty bad. (See below).
       Oddly enough, it appears that Tandem never did figure out what was wrong with their driver.
       They have graphs plotting the theoretical arrival pattern vs the observed pattern, and they don’t
       match.

       They also noted that they were not getting the expected throughput, (i.e. if the driver tried to
       average 200 tps, they would observe 180 tps.) Either they didn’t figure it out, or they were
       cheating a little to save their response time.

       I would not do the driver this way. I would randomize the think time between transactions. This is
       much cleaner, and more realistic. If we want to average 10 seconds between transactions, and
       our average response time is one second, we simply set the average think time to nine seconds.

       E. Response times were measured from the driver system. The original ET1
       specified response times from the last bit in the x.25 line to the first
       bit out. It is much easier to measure from the driver, so it seems like
       a good change, even if it adds .2 seconds to response times.

       F. They relaxed the original throughput definition. Old ET1 specified that^Jhge^hroughput be
       measured when 95% of the transactions finished in less than one second. "Tandem has relaxed
       that requirement to be 90% of the transactions finishing in two seconds. This is a substantial
       change that they required because of the adverse queueing nature of their system. (See the
       SESC article I wrote on G200_Sizing.) To get the high throughput numbers Tandem ran the
       benchmarks with the CPUs 80% to 90% busy. This results in severe queueing and response
       time problems. Before we throw many stones, however, we need to see how well we do
       ourselves with TP and random arrival times.

        G. The terminals have been redefined. Instead of 3270 style blockmode terminals they are no'-*'
        intelligent cluster controllers sending a formatted x.25 message. This saves a nontrivial amount
        of CPU time per transaction. In fact, Tandem had absolutely no code for formatting an output
        buffer. This does simplify the benchmark some more.

        H. Multiple History files seem to be OK. In very high volume applications, writing to a single
        sequential file always becomes the ultimate bottleneck. From a talk by Jim Gray last year I heard
        Tandem was wrestling with this problem. Apparently they punted, and took the
        easy way out. This should undermine any criticisms they have about our multifile implementation.




7   Stratus Confidential             Working Document                                   August 11,1987
        I. All disks were mirrored. This makes sense for us and Tandem. I doubt any other vendors will
        worry about it. The transaction logs are required to be mirrored.

        J. The benchmark was audited. I imagine it is likely that prospects will start to expect this of any
        other vendor claiming ET1 numbers.


        Tandem’s GoFast Tricks

        Pathway Hacks.

        The TCP’s did almost nothing. No screen formatting (they did not even include a Screen Section)
        as the terminal type was ’intelligent’. Almost no data movement at all, the x25 message is sent
        directly to the server without modification or movement. The reply is moved whole to the x25
        output buffer. The TCPs were NOT run NonStop. They did no checkpointing. Theoreticaly they
        are relying on the autorestart facility. The transaction loop of consists of the following (pseudo)
        SCOBOL:
           Loop.
               Begin-transaction.
               Send tx-datato "eta"
                   Reply-code yields etc.
               If <ok>
                   End-transaction
                   Move server-data to x25-out
                   Send message x25-out
                      Reply yields tx-data
               Else <error>

        TMF Hacks.

        The delta cost of a TMF transaction is actually proportional to the number of disk processes
        touched by a transaction. This is because each disk process that participated in a TMF
        transaction has to send a message to the Audit Process (the disk process that owns the Audit
        Trails). The Topgun team carefully partitioned the data files so that all the records corresponding
        to a particular branch were on the same physical disk. They call that the ATB disk (Account-
        Teller-Branch). This reduces the number of audit messages from three to one. The disk procs
        also buffer the writes to the audit procs, the net result is that the ATB disk process only sends .4
        messages to the audit disk procs per transaction, and do^5 checkpoints per transaction. The
        History file is common for each node, on a disk by itself. The buffering works even better for this
        disk, it sends .05 messages to the Audit procs per transaction, and does an equal number of
        checkpoints. The Audit disk process winds up receiving .5 msgs pertx. For each message it
        does one physical write and one checkpoint to its backup process. The TMF Monitor process
        receives 1.3 messages per transaction.

        File Hacks.

        Tandem set up their files so that almost all logical lOs are handled by cache hits. Teller, Branch,
        and History are all in cache. The only physical lOs are one physical read of the Account
        file, and one physical mirrored write of the account file. We need two physical reads of the^affi$),
        and one physical mirrored write of the account file. We need two physical reads of the account
        file per transcation, due to our indexed file type (vs their VSAM style files.)

        The above file is also available in Microsoft WORD format.




8   Stratus Confidential             Working Document                                  August 11,1987
