
Intel’s Centrino: Don’t Man the Barricades

Intel’s Centrino is an evolutionary step in wireless notebook computers
that is likely to cause all sorts of reactions, some revolutionary.  It’s
critical for IT executives to sort out the benefits from the gotchas of
mobile employees.  Unfortunately, we see signs that more than a few IT
shops are willing to opt out on Centrino’s chief benefit, wireless
computing.

What’s Centrino and Why Should I Care?
Hey, we went on vacation last month so we can understand that you might
have missed the opening salvo in Intel’s $300 marketing launch of Centrino.
 The TV and newspaper ads and the billboards in Times Square, for instance.
 The key points are:  Centrino is an all new, integrated set of electronics
from Intel that consists of a mobile Pentium 4, a chipset, and an 802.11-
compatible wireless Ethernet adapter and radio.  This integrated platform
was built from the ground up for long battery life – over five hours – and
better performance than today’s Pentium 3 and Pentium 4 mobile processors.
All the major notebook computer companies are rolling out Centrino
products, at attractive, mainstream prices.  Consumers version of Centrino
will untether people to compute out on the sundeck.  Enterprise versions
will enable information workers to keep up to date while on the go – the so-
called always on, always available mantra.

Centrino is the most important introduction that Intel, the industry’s
dominant microprocessor supplier, will make in 2003.  Besides the glitz of
the ad campaigns, the company is spending tens of millions of dollars to
accelerate a worldwide network of  wireless access points -- so-called hot
spots – where 802.11-enabled computers including Centrinos can get on the
Internet for all the reasons that the Internet has taken a role in our
lives.

The evolutionary fact of Centrino is simply that other 802.11 and wireless
approaches exist in the market.  It is the clout, market-awareness
building, and wireless infrastructure-building muscle of Intel that makes
Centrino’s introduction not just another product launch but a milestone in
the adaptation of computers into our lives.  Mark down March 12th, 2003 on
your computer history calendar.

The revolutionary aspects of the Centrino notebooks and the wireless-
everywhere world that will follow imply consequences that deserve
consideration.  We’ll leave the question as to whether the initial wireless
public infrastructure will provide a consumer-friendly quality of service
for another day.  The immediate question for IT decision-makers is what to
do about all those wireless notebooks that are about to invade the
corporate campus?

The Wireless Invasion is at Hand
The scenario is simply stated:  Centrino notebooks come with wireless
connectivity for free – it’s part of the platform and you won’t save any
money by deleting the 802.11 part on the order form.  That means future
notebooks, which represent a quarter or more of personal computer units
sold to enterprises, will virtually all come standard with wireless
Ethernet connectivity.  In and of itself, that is not a problem.  However,
802.11 requires time, effort, and money from the IT department to make
wireless networking secure.  And any employee can walk down to CompUSA on
Saturday and come back with a $90 wireless access point (AP) that connects
their notebook to the corporate wired network.  All they have to do is plug
the AP into a ubiquitous RJ45 wired LAN receptacle using a $3 CAT-5 cable.
Unfortunately, this wireless AP also let’s anyone within about 150’ also
have access to the corporate network if the AP is not properly secured.
This unobtrusive exposure of the corporate network can be a breech in an
otherwise well-managed and secure network.  This is why such wireless
access points are called “rogues”.

Centrino Wireless: Banned in Boston?
Faced with the prospect of  rogue access points, many IT executives are
reacting by banning wireless notebooks because they are the reason wireless
access points are being deployed by users outside of the IT department’s
domain in the first place.  One notebook supplier expects more than a
quarter of its business Centrino notebooks to ship with explicit IT
department instructions to remove the wireless radio mini-card at the
factory – permanently neutering the Centrino’s ability to work wirelessly
on the corporate campus or anywhere else.

A Better Solution
Banning wireless is about as effective as keeping hormone-charged teenagers
apart.  Occasionally successful but never assured.  Recent developments
make wireless security and authentication much more practical.  Cisco is
making its LEAP protocol available to the industry.  Centrino is LEAP-
aware.  And Microsoft’s Windows Server 2003 can be hardened for wireless
environments, as Microsoft has proven on its own campus and elsewhere.
Services are readily available to investigate and secure a wireless
campus..

I believe Centrino notebooks – and the wireless network they work best in –
should become one of the standard IT infrastructure building blocks.
PricewaterhouseCoopers says that the additional initial costs of wireless
notebooks can achieve a return on investment in six months or less.
Aberdeen Group research indicates that a campus-bound meeting-attendee can
be productive an extra 30 minutes a day.  Task workers such as physicians
can see an hour a day in productivity improvements in conjunction with
digital record-keeping.  Senior executives, sales and support people will
quickly subscribe to public wires services – just like they were expensing
cell phones well before a corporate policy was put in place.

Taking the wireless out of Centrino leaves the buyer with – longer battery
life, a nice but not consequential benefit.  This artificial barricade to
wireless will be impossible to police.  The better solution is to face the
inevitability and desirability of a wireless world and embrace it.

