
AberdeenGroup















                                      Consumer Adoption
                                       of Memory Cards:
                                      A Qualitiative Study


                                      An Executive Report
                                      to the Board of the
                                      Internet Home Alliance







                                      July 2003

                                      July 28, 2003 DRAFT

                                      Aberdeen Group, Inc.
                                      260 Franklin Street
                                      Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112 USA
                                      Telephone: 617 723 7890
                                      Fax: 617 723 7897
                                      www.aberdeen.com
Table of Contents


Table of Contents      1
Consumer Adoption of Memory Cards: A Qualitiative Study  1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY      1
  Summary of Key Findings    1
  Background and Purpose     5
    The Internet Home Alliance    5
    Secure Digital Memory Cards   5
    Project Scope 6
    Methodology   6
  A Caution 7
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS    9
  I.  Usage of Digital Technology 9
    A.  Types of Technology Used  9
      1.    Consistent with screening requirements, respondents in all focus
      groups and IDIs own and use a range of digital technology.  Types of
      technology most commonly owned by participants include:  desktop
      computers, printers, and digital cameras.    9
      2.    Desktop computers are owned by virtually everyone participating
      in this research and are used for a wide range of purposes, including
      personal, business, and school-related functions.  9
      3.    After computers, cameras are the digital technology most likely
      to be owned by participants in this research.  Many respondents make
      extensive use of their digital cameras, primarily for personal
      reasons, but sometimes for business purposes as well.    10
      4.    Digital video camcorders are most likely to be owned by families
      raising children.      11
      5.    Quite a few respondents across these focus groups and IDIs
      download music from the internet, although only a few have MP3
      players.    11
      6.    Some respondents in these focus groups also have PDAs, which are
      often used primarily for work/business purposes, but sometimes for
      personal reasons as well.    12
    B.  Transfer of Digital Data  13
      1.    Many respondents in these focus groups and IDIs claim that
      transferring digital data is very important to them.  San Diego
      respondents and Boston Early Adopters are more likely to consider this
      activity "very important" than others.  13
      2.    Digital data is transferred by various means, depending on what
      type of data it is and the available resources.  Photos are most
      likely to be transferred via some type of cable or wire link, although
      a few respondents transfer photos by moving memory cards.     14
      3.    Comparatively few respondents transfer video, and those who do
      are primarily living in family households.   15
      4.    Transfer of music is primarily a matter of downloading from the
      Internet onto a PC, and then burning CDs.    15
      5.    A few respondent report they have local area networks in their
      households and occasionally use them to transfer digital information.
      Wireless transfer of digital data is only done with PDAs.     16
      6.    Participants in this research generally agree it is quick and
      easy to transfer digital information from one technology to another.
      Some also appreciate the ability to modify what they have transferred
      and the speed with which they can have access to photos and music.  16
      7.    While many respondents are very satisfied with the process they
      use to transfer digital information (particularly photos), others
      express concerns about equipment purchases, multi-step processes with
      poorly written instructions, difficulty transferring photos when away
      from home, and dissatisfaction with the quality of photos.    17
      8.    One solution to digital data transfer problems suggested by a
      few respondents across the focus groups is to develop a wireless
      capability. 18
      9.    Respondents living in family households often report that not
      everyone in their household is involved in transferring digital data.
      In contrast, respondents living in households of unrelated individuals
      often say all or most household members transfer digital data.      19
      10.   Most respondents living in households where some others shy away
      from transferring digital material feel the best inducement for
      involving other household members would be simplifying the process. 20
    C.  Storage of Digital Data   21
      1.    Most respondents use their computer's hard drive as storage for
      their digital photos.  Some respondents transfer photos to CDs, either
      as a back up or because they do not have adequate space on their hard
      drive.      21
      2.    Music downloaded from the Internet is typically transferred to
      CDs (unless a respondent has a MP3 player) to save space on the hard
      drive.      22
      3.    Respondents store most video by transferring it to VHS tapes.  A
      few respondents have transferred video to CDs, and isolated
      respondents store video on their hard drive. 22
      4.    No one in these focus groups uses memory cards for permanent
      storage of any digital data. 22
      5.    Respondents generally report few digital information storage
      problems.  Running out of space on their computers and having a large
      number of CDs or tapes to store are the issues mentioned most often.
      23
    D.  Digital Technology Information Sources     24
      1.    Respondents in these focus groups rely on many different sources
      of information to learn about developments in digital technology.  The
      most frequently cited source is word-of-mouth recommendations.      24
      2.    Another very important source of information is the Internet.
      Many respondents go online to learn about new products or to get
      additional information about products they may already be using.    24
      3.    Some respondents consider consumer electronics retailers and
      computer stores to be good sources of information, but others do not.
      Still, most note they ultimately go to local stores to see the
      products of interest to them.     25
      4.    Mass media sources of information (e.g., newspapers, magazines,
      and television) are used by some respondents.  Mail order catalogues
      serve as a source of information for some others.  26
  II.  Current Usage and Impressions of Memory Cards     27
    A.  Usage of Memory Cards     27
      1.    Awareness and usage of memory cards vary across the focus groups
      and IDIs.  Boston Early Adopters and younger respondents in all
      groups/ IDIs are most likely to be aware of memory cards, as are users
      of digital cameras.    27
      2.    Many respondents cannot say what brand of memory card they are
      currently using. 27
      3.    Respondents using memory cards most commonly report they use
      them in their digital cameras and/or PDAs.   28
      4.    Most users of memory cards in digital cameras never remove their
      memory card from the camera, since all transferring of images is done
      through a cable connection.  28
    B.  Advantages of Memory Cards      29
      1.    Respondents currently using memory cards feel this medium has
      several advantages.  One advantage mentioned very frequently is the
      small size, and associated portability, of the cards.    29
      2.    Another positive feature of memory cards is that they come in
      various capacities, allowing one memory card to potentially hold a
      great deal of digital data.  29
      3.    The reusability of memory cards also appeals to many current
      users.      30
      4.    A few respondents, primarily in the San Diego focus groups, feel
      declining prices and versatility are advantages of the memory card. 30
    C.  Disadvantages of Memory Cards   31
      1.    Many users feel the memory card's small size is both an
      advantage (in terms of portability) and a disadvantage because it
      makes the card easy to misplace or break.    31
      2.    Memory card users who are aware that memory cards come in a
      variety of formats find this to be a disadvantage. 31
      3.    Some memory card users mention either price or capacity as
      disadvantages of memory cards.    32
  III.  Post-Demonstration Reactions to SD Memory Card   33
    A.  Perceived Benefits   33
      1.    After viewing the SD Memory Card demonstration, some respondents
      (in both the focus groups and IDIs) clearly feel this product (and
      what it can do) has a high "cool factor."    33
      2.    A key benefit of SD Memory Cards communicated through the
      demonstration is the card's ability to be used with many different
      types of technologies.  This "versatility," as many respondents call
      it, sets the card apart from others in the category.     33
      3.    Another advantage recognized by respondents across the groups
      and IDIs is the SD Memory Card's small size, particularly in relation
      to the amount of digital information it can store. 34
      4.    Quite a few respondents feel the SD Memory Card could help them
      save time in transferring digital information.  The process of doing
      so seems quicker and easier than what they are currently doing.     35
      5.    A few respondents, primarily in the San Diego focus groups, feel
      another advantage of the SD Memory Card is that it could replace other
      storage devices. 36
    B.  Perceived Drawbacks  36
      1.    The key perceived drawback of the SD Memory Card is the need for
      users to have the equipment that allows them to take advantage of its
      capabilities.    36
      2.    Many respondents in the focus groups and IDIs also express
      concern about the small size of the SD Memory Card, which is perceived
      to be both an advantage and a disadvantage.  37
      3.    A few participants express concerns about the SD Memory Card in
      relation to the following issues:  how well the card works with older
      equipment and how easy it is to maintain.    38
    C.  Expected Impact on Usage of Digital Technology   39
      1.    Some respondents, particularly in Boston, can identify specific
      changes they would make in their use of the technology they currently
      own if they were to use the SD Memory Card.  39
      2.    Many respondents, however, indicate that they would not expect
      their usage of current technology to change if they used the SD Memory
      Card. 40
    D.  Purchase Intent and Pricing     41
      1.    Quite a few participants in these focus groups would take a
      "wait and see" attitude before deciding to purchase the SD Memory
      Card. 41
      2.    The greatest barrier to purchase intent, however, is that most
      respondents do not currently own equipment that can use the SD Memory
      Card. 42
      3.    San Diego respondents and teens participating in the IDIs are
      more likely than others to say they are interested in purchasing the
      SD Memory Card.  43
      4.    Most respondents have great difficulty articulating how much
      they would be willing to pay for the SD Memory Card on an unaided
      basis.      44
      5.    Some respondents consider the pricing issue in terms of the cost
      of alternative media now being used for the same purpose.     44
      6.    A review of the show card describing the capacities of various
      SD memory cards in terms of how many photos it can hold, as well as
      audio and video output helps respondents focus their thinking about
      pricing.  Most would select a larger capacity card, but would be
      willing to pay relatively little for it.     45
      7.    Most respondents initially indicate they would want to purchase
      one larger SD Memory Card instead of several smaller ones.  However,
      interest in multiple small cards rises when potential uses are
      suggested on an aided basis. 46
    E.  Impact of SD Memory Card Capability on Digital Product Purchase
    Decisions     47
      1.    Most respondents claim SD Memory Card capability is not likely
      to be a key factor in digital product purchase decisions.     47
      2.    Most respondents agree that if they already had one product with
      SD Memory Card capability, they would make it a priority to have this
      capability in technology devices they purchased subsequently. 48
      3.    The vast majority of respondents expect products with SD Memory
      Card capability to be just as easy to use as comparable products
      without it. 48
      4.    Many respondents agree they would be willing to pay a premium
      for SD Memory Card capability in new digital equipment they purchased.
       However, a sizeable segment of respondents would be unwilling to do
      so.   49
  IV.  Retail Environment    51
    A.  Purchasing Sources   51
      1.    Respondents across the focus groups and IDIs would expect to be
      able to purchase SD Memory Cards in a wide range of retail and on-line
      outlets.    51
      2.    Some respondents also feel the distribution of SD Memory Cards
      will ultimately go beyond the expected sources and include a still
      wider array of retail organizations.    51
    B.  In-Store Positioning of SD Memory Cards    52
      1.    Most respondents expect SD Memory Cards to be found in multiple
      locations throughout a consumer electronics store, including with
      other storage devices, in a separate section of the store.    52
      2.    Most respondents, however, would also expect the SD Memory Card
      to be displayed with any digital equipment that uses it. 52
  V.  Communication of Key SD Memory Card Benefits 53
    A.  Key Benefits   53
      1.    Respondents across the focus groups identify similar key
      benefits for the SD Memory Card.  Those mentioned most often include:
      size, portability, universality, capacity, ease-of-use, and speed.  53
    B.  Communication Strategies  54
      2.    Respondents make a wide range of suggestions concerning how the
      SD Memory Card's benefits can be communicated; many focus on the
      Internet, mass media or promotions.     54
      3.    Many teams across the focus groups also emphasize that product
      demonstrations would be an important and effective way to communicate
      the benefits of the SD Memory Card.     55
APPENDIX A: 56
DISCUSSION GUIDE AND SCREENERS    56
BOSTON MEMORY CARD SCREENER - IDI's     66
MEMORY CARD SCREENER — GROUPS     77
SAN DIEGO MEMORY CARD SCREENER — IDI's  87
MEMORY CARD SCREENER — SAN DIEGO GROUPS 98





Consumer Adoption of Memory Cards:
A Qualitative Study


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


The Digital Electronics Market is Maturing Rapidly

The lifestyle use of digital electronics, led by digital cameras, is
becoming pervasive among all age groups and economic backgrounds.  It was
easy to fill the slots in the two cities (Boston and San Diego) where focus
group and individual direct interviews (IDIs) were held.  Aberdeen views
the market as more mature from a receptivity and likely future buying
pattern basis as a result of this study than we would have conjectured
prior to the study.

It Often Starts With a Digital Camera …

The explosive growth of digital cameras, combined with the ubiquitous
availability of home PCs and Internet access, is a clear market stimulant.
The Internet as a keep-in-touch lifestyle element is absolutely true.  Once
acquired, digital cameras are used in place of traditional film cameras,
but with two technology twists:
Digital photos are e-mailed to friends and family, and printed locally.  E-
mail is a key behavioral driver.
A measurable minority of consumers take on photo manipulation and
enhancement as a hobby.  They are comfortable with this.

… or Music on MP3s

Young people are highly likely to store and use music digitally.  They make
MP3s, store them on CD-ROMs, and use them as personal entertainment on MP3
players or to share with friends.  All ages are beginning to store
legitimate music collections on PCs, and some are thinking about
transferring photos and videos to PC digital storage.

Digital Data Manipulation Goes Mainstream

Digital manipulation of data, be it songs, movies, or photos, is clearly
becoming mainstream.  A majority of consumers are comfortable with using
digital electronics products, and a minority report that in the past year
they have significantly increased the time spent creating digital content
(e.g., PhotoShop) as a hobby or as a means to author content (e.g., home
digital movie making).  Thus, data transfer from the capture device to the
display/print/PC manipulate device becomes a recognized and routine way to
deal with digital data.
The implications for a robust transition to digital electronics from
traditional consumer electronics are obvious.  However, this study did not
determine the boundaries of the transition timeframe, which we would put at
a decade from now.

Data Content Portability Rises in Importance

Almost all consumers are aware that digital data content is portable.  MP3
players and digital cameras with memory cards were frequently cited as
examples.  The ability to move data from one device to another is
considered a key advantage to digital electronics products.  One reason is
the ability to take the content outside the home, where it can be used at
work or play (e.g., an MP3 player) or shared with friends and family (e.g.,
photos on a memory card).

The Memory Card is a Recognized Digital-Data Content Carrier

Primarily due to the ubiquity of digital cameras, the vast majority of
consumers was both aware of and/or knew they had a memory card.  The
implication is that memory card what-is-it-used-for education is not
required as part of a marketing campaign.
However, the majority were unable to identify the type of memory card they
owned.  This lack of recognition of the taxonomy of memory cards — the
card’s market and technology strengths and weaknesses — becomes an
inhibitor to the market adoption of SD memory cards.  Moreover, the memory
card choice to date has been driven by the product the card is used in:
consumers are not yet buying digital electronics products based on
compatibility with existing memory cards that they already own.

Perceived Advantages and Disadvantages of Memory Cards

The focus groups did not have much difficulty identifying and reaching
consensus on the advantages and disadvantages of memory cards.
The advantages are: small size; capacity choice; re-usability; and
improving price points.
The disadvantages are: small size can be lost; variety of incompatible
formats; price, particularly in larger capacities.

Memory Card Capacity:  More is Better

Retail stores apparently are getting better at advising buyers about the
small capacity of memory cards installed at the factory.  A significant
minority report they bought higher capacity cards so they could store more
photos or songs.
Once the focus groups had studied a chart of memory capacities versus
content capacity (e.g., how many photos can the card hold?), they strongly
chose higher capacities for hypothetical future purchases — mostly in the
range of 256 MB to 1 GB where price was not a consideration.  Given a
choice of personal cards for a family versus an investment in a “big”
capacity card, consumers choose one big card.

The Digital Electronics Future for Memory Cards is Bright

When shown a demonstration of the interchangeability of content between
cameras, camcorders, printers, PCs, PDAs, DVDs and other digital
electronics products, the most frequent response was “wow!”  Focus group
participants were visibly excited about the prospect of using memory cards
as a medium for content storage and transport.
Importantly, consumers in the panels easily made the connections needed to
ensure a more widespread adoption of memory cards.  Aberdeen believes the
main connected dots are:
Standardizing on one memory card format ensures compatibility across a wide
variety of digital products.  Note:  the SD memory card is one contender
but not the assured winner since card type is not well understood.
Many electronics products are appearing with memory card slots, and
consumers are comfortable with moving a memory card(s) from product to
product
Consumer’s current electronic products do not have memory card slots, and
consumers are unwilling — not surprisingly — to throw out what they have
just to get memory card capability.  The transition will take time, which
we put at the better part of a decade to complete.


SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS

Respondents own and use a wide range of digital technology, with the vast
majority owning:  desktop computers, printers, and digital cameras.  Other
digital technology owned by some respondents includes:  video camcorders,
DVD players, PDAs, scanners, MP3 players, photo printers, and laptops.
Transferring digital data is important to many respondents, particularly to
San Diego respondents and "early adopters" in the Boston market.  Younger
respondents participating in the individual direct interviews (IDIs) who
regard it as a leisure time activity, also consider transferring digital
data very important.  Older respondents (particularly in Boston) seem
reluctant to state this is not a very important activity to them, but
several report they have limited technology (for financial reasons) or that
they use both digital and non-digital means of meeting their communication
needs.
Digital data is transferred by various means, depending on the type of data
and the available resources:
        •  digital photos are most frequently transferred to PCs via a
           cable or wire link, although a minority of respondents use
           memory cards,
        •  video footage is most frequently transferred by connecting the
           camcorder to the VCR and transferring the footage to VHS tapes,
        •  music is most typically transferred by downloading it onto a PC
           and then burning CDs.
Only a few respondents across the focus groups and IDIs have in-home local
area networks, which they occasionally use for transferring data.  Wireless
transfer of data is limited to PDAs.
Many respondents find it quick and easy to transfer images, particularly
photos, from one technology to another.  After the initial set-up, most
report they simply connect a wire from their camera to their computer
through a USB port, and click on an icon.  Transfers from camcorders are
also considered straightforward, while music is regarded as the most
difficult type of digital transfer because of the amount of computer memory
it requires and the time it takes to both download the material and burn
CDs.
Respondents who express dissatisfaction with how they transfer digital data
typically focus on the following:  the need for additional equipment
purchases, lack of sufficient USB ports to use several peripherals
simultaneously, and complex, poorly-written instructions that are hard to
follow.  In addition, some respondents are dissatisfied with the capacity
of the memory cards in their digital cameras and the difficulty of
transferring pictures from their memory card while traveling.
Many respondents are unable to suggest solutions for the difficulties they
face transferring digital data, but a few respondents feel wireless
transmission should be the ultimate goal.  This will reduce the amount of
equipment needed and steps required to accomplish desired data transfer.
Research participants living in family households report that some
household members are uninvolved in the transfer of digital data.
Typically, one adult head-of-household, along with one or more
teenaged/young adult children, engages in this activity.  Whether it is the
male or female head-of-household who becomes involved in data transfer
varies from household to household.  In contrast, young adults living with
their peers, and young marrieds, typically indicate everyone in the
household transfers data.
Those living in households where some members are reluctant to become
involved in digital data transfer feel the best way to induce participation
is to simplify and shorten the process.
Most respondents have few concerns about the storage of their digital data.
 Typical practices include storing photos on PC hard drives (and
occasionally, CDs), storing video on VHS tapes, and storing music on CDs.
No one participating in this research uses memory cards to store digital
data.
Most agree thy have little difficulty retrieving digital material if they
have taken the time to label their files or devices.  A few respondents
express some concerns about the number of CDs or videotapes they need to
store.  Respondents who download music are most likely to say they have
less hard drive memory than they'd like, because music files are so large.
Most respondents, however, feel storage space is not an issue for them at
present.
Usage of memory cards varies among the research participants, with Boston
early adopters and younger respondents in all groups/IDIs most likely to be
users.  Digital camera owners are also likely to say they use memory cards
(although not all are aware they do), along with those using PDAs.  Many
respondents cannot say what brand of memory card they use.  Sony Memory
Stick users appear to be most brand-aware.
Memory card users feel the medium has several advantages, including:  small
size/portability, varying capacities, and reusability.  A few respondents
also feel declining prices and compatibility with various technologies are
advantages of memory cards.
Memory card users also feel they have two key disadvantages:  their small
size makes them easy to misplace or break and they come in a variety of
formats.  In addition, some respondents consider them expensive and/or
lacking in sufficient capacity.
Reactions to the SD Memory Card demonstration are largely positive.  The
product has a high "cool factor" for some respondents, primarily because of
the many products it works with.  The card's "versatility," (e.g., ability
to work with a wide range of technologies and manufacturer's products) is
considered a key advantage by many respondents.  Other benefits widely
recognized by respondents include:  small size/portability, the
availability of various (including, large) capacities, and speed.  Some
respondents, particularly those in San Diego, feel the SD Memory Card could
replace other storage devices, such as CDs and videotapes, saving users
both time and space.
The key drawback of the SD Memory Card is that users need to own compatible
equipment.  The more compatible equipment a user owns, the more he or she
can benefit from usage of the memory card.  Many research participants
indicate they currently own no compatible equipment, and the need to
acquire such equipment is viewed as a drawback for the memory card.
Another key drawback is the memory card's size, which is perceived to be
notably smaller than many currently used by respondents.  In addition to
the risk of loss, or having children and pets swallow the small unit,
respondents are also concerned about the ease of labeling the device so
they can easily retrieve material stored there.  Finally, some respondents
have concerns that even if adapters are/become available, the card will not
function as quickly as it does with state-of-the-art equipment, depriving
them of one of its key benefits.
Some respondents, particularly those from the Boston market, can identify
specific ways they are likely to change their use of digital technology.
Those mentioned most frequently include:  taking more digital photos,
creating family photo albums to store on the memory card, and downloading
more music.
Most respondents, however, do not feel the SD Memory Card would change
their usage of the digital technology they already own because it is not
compatible with the memory card.  Many express reluctance to acquire
technology that could be used with the SD Memory Card because they are
unsure it will become the "industry standard," instead of being eclipsed by
a newer, better technology.
Many respondents will take a "wait and see" attitude toward purchasing the
SD Memory Card.  Boston respondents, particularly, express concern about
whether this product will be widely accepted, or quickly fade away.
However, at least
Some respondents in all groups, as well as adults participating in IDIs,
are skeptical about purchasing the memory card (and the equipment needed to
maximize its usefulness) without assurance it will be in the market over
the longer term.  However, the key barrier to immediate adoption of the SD
Memory Card is respondents' lack of compatible equipment.
Respondents' qualms about purchasing equipment compatible with the SD
Memory Card range from income constraints, to concerns about the long-term
status of the technology, to satisfaction with their current manner of
transferring digital data.  Overall, San Diego respondents and teens
participating in the IDIs are most likely to say they are interested in
purchasing the SD Memory Card.
Respondents have great difficulty articulating what they would be willing
to pay for the SD Memory Card.  Past purchasers of any memory card
sometimes use the prices they paid as benchmarks.  Others, consider the
cost of other storage media (such as DVDs, videotapes, or CDs).  Overall,
respondents are prepared to pay less than the anticipated prices of the
product at various capacities. In addition, they expect product prices to
decline over time.
If purchasing the SD Memory Card, most respondents would opt for a larger
capacity card (to meet their largest anticipated need) over several smaller
ones.  On an aided basis, however, some respondents with children, as well
as some who use a wide range of technologies, acknowledge that several
smaller cards could be more advantageous.
The vast majority of respondents feel SD Memory Card capability would be a
minor consideration in their choice of new digital technology products.
However, many would regard it as a "tie breaker," opting for products with
the capability over very similar products without the capability.  However,
having acquired one product with SD Memory Card capability, they would be
more likely to seek the capability in subsequent digital technology product
purchases.
Respondents are divided in their opinions about whether they would pay a
premium for products with SD Memory Card capability.  A substantial
proportion would be willing to do so, although how much of a premium they
would pay is unclear.  Quite a few of these respondents indicate it would
be in the 10 - 15% range, although some would pay more.  On the other hand,
a notable proportion of respondents claim they would not pay a premium.
Many of these respondents indicate they would wait to see if the product
became an established standard, and then expect the capability to be widely
incorporated in new digital products (at no additional charge).  In
general, respondents do not expect products with SD Memory Card capability
to be any more difficult to use than those without it.
Respondents expect the SD Memory Card would be widely distributed through
retail and on-line sources.  Consumer electronics stores such as Best Buy,
computer stores, office superstores, warehouse clubs, and mass merchants
(like Target and Wal-Mart) are all expected to sell SD Memory Cards, along
with any websites selling digital technology.  In addition, non-traditional
outlets, such as toy stores, grocery stores, audio/video stores, and
pharmacies are all expected to eventually carry SD Memory Cards (much like
the currently sell film).
SD Memory Cards are expected to be displayed in the storage and accessories
section of consumer electronics stores, as well as with each type of
product in which they can be used.  Consumers want to face no difficulties
finding memory cards, whether they come into a consumer electronics store
expressly to purchase one, or whether they are primarily purchasing a
product that uses it.
Teams of respondents in the various focus groups agree the SD Memory Card
has the following key benefits:  size, portability, universality
(versatility), capacity, ease-of-use, and speed.  Along with mass media
(TV, radio, print) and on-line advertising, along with direct mail
campaigns, most teams highlight the importance of product demonstrations as
a means of communicating the memory card's key benefits.  They believe in-
store demonstrations, continuous loop videos, infomercials, and
opportunities for respondents to get "hands-on" exposure to the SD Memory
Card are the best way to communicate what it can do for users.

Background and Purpose


The Internet Home Alliance

The Internet Home Alliance (IHA) is a trade association of companies
involved in digital home electronics.  For this project, members of the
alliance are primarily interested in more effectively marketing the SD
Memory Card, although a home electronics retailer who distributes memory
cards nationally also participates in the consortium.

Secure Digital Memory Cards

The SD memory card is a portable storage product that can be used to
transfer digital information (including still images, video, music, and
text) from one device to another.  It allows users to gather information
via one device and then edit, share, or output it on another device.

Project Scope

In order to maximize the effectiveness of its marketing strategies, the IHA
commissioned primary qualitative market research to better understand the
target audience's needs, expectations, and buying behaviors.  Specifically,
the goals of this research were to explore the following issues:
1)    how the target market currently meets data transfer needs, the pros
      and cons of current methods, and identification of any unmet needs,
2)    reactions to the SD memory card, potential uses for the card, and
      comparisons to other options for data storage/portability,
3)    identification of the product features/characteristics of greatest
      value to potential users and the likelihood that use of the SD memory
      card would change behavior with respect to use of memory cards and/or
      host products,
4)    potential uses for the additional storage capacity provided by the SD
      memory card,
5)    likelihood to purchase SD memory cards at various price points and
      the impact of SD memory card purchases on the purchasing of
      peripherals which utilize them, and
6)    target audience expectations of the purchase experience (e.g.,
      where/how will they be sold and where will they be displayed in a
      retail store environment).

Methodology

Qualitative research was the chosen methodology for addressing the issues
facing IHA because of the opportunities it provides for open-ended
exploration of topics and issues.  A total of six focus groups were
conducted.  Three were held in the Boston area (on June 9 and 10, 2003),
and three in San Diego (on June 23 and 24, 2003).  In addition, 11 in-depth
interviews (six in Boston and five in San Diego) were completed among
parent/child dyads or triads.
Respondents qualified to participate in the focus groups met the following
      qualifications:
•     Own at least one of the following digital devices (purchased for home
use)
      •     Video Camcorder
      •     Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)
      •     Printer which uses a memory card
      •     Digital Camera
      •     HP Media Center PC
      •     Notebook PC with a memory card
      •     MP3 player with a memory card slot

•     Are the primary user of at least one of the digital devices owned by
      the household
•     Are aware of memory cards
•     Are between 18 and 70 years of age
•     Live in a variety of household settings (e.g., living alone, living
      with spouse/partner and/or children etc.)
•     Are not "Early Adopters" of technology (based on four batteries of
      attitudinal questions)*
•     Are not employed in advertising, market research, public relations,
      or in sales, marketing, or marketing communications for a
      manufacturer, distributor or retailer of consumer electronics or
      technology products.
•     Have not participated in a market research group discussion during
      the past six months.
One Boston group consisted of respondents who qualify as "Early Adopters"
based on four batteries of attitudinal questions.
Respondents qualified to participate in the in-depth interviews met the
same product purchase/usage qualifications as focus group participants
(outlined above).  In addition, they met the following criteria:
•     Live in a household with a child/children who is/are 11 to 17 years
      of age,
•     Have at least one child who also uses one or more of the target
      digital devices,
•     Able to participate in the interview along with one or more qualified
      children (and possibly, a spouse).
Tabulated respondent questionnaire data is included in Appendix A of this
      report.
Copies of the screeners and discussion guide are included in Appendix B of
this report.

A Caution

The results of this study are presented as observations or hypotheses, not
as incontrovertible facts; the sample sizes were small and not
representative in a statistical sense.  The hypotheses which follow should
be checked against quantitative data on the same subject and/or verified by
additional quantitative or experimental research.

DETAILS OF FINDINGS


I.  Usage of Digital Technology


A.  Types of Technology Used


1.    Consistent with screening requirements, respondents in all focus
groups and IDIs own and use a range of digital technology.  Types of
technology most commonly owned by participants include:  desktop computers,
printers, and digital cameras.

In addition, some respondents participating in this research own Palm
Pilots, video camcorders, DVD players, scanners, MP3 players, laptops,
and/or photo printers.  Some participants also note they subscribe to
digital cable.

2.    Desktop computers are owned by virtually everyone participating in
this research and are used for a wide range of purposes, including
personal, business, and school-related functions.

In addition to their traditional functions as a means of creating and
storing various types of documents, desktop computers are significant to
digital technology because they typically are the means by which users
access e-mail capability and the software they need to manipulate digital
data (e.g., pictures, music etc.).  Desktop computers (and laptops, for
those who choose that option) are often the lynch pin upon which a users'
integration of digital technology depends.  Although respondents do not
often describe their computers in these terms, comments regarding how they
use digital technology reveal this role.
"The computer linking in personal use is as an entertainment center,
information center, a communication center.  If it's e-mail, fax, or music
or people we're talking about taking digital pictures of.  It's like with
my granddaughter, I bought this tiny digital camera which can be used as a
web camera.  So I hold it and say 'hey, log on and you can see me now.'
And they hadn't seen me for seven months, so this is great."  (San Diego
male)
"I think the thing I use most is my PC.  I'm on it from dawn until dusk,
and my cell phone, too.  I just got a digital camera, as well, which I plan
to use extensively.  I'll put the pictures on my PC, where I can edit and
send them, however I want."  (Boston male)
"I make a lot of artistic CDs.  Because with the Mac I can make play lists
that download to my computer.  I make CD's and also do a lot of e-mail
communicating with my friends around the country.  I use the computer a lot
to send and receive stuff and just work with it."  (Boston female)

3.    After computers, cameras are the digital technology most likely to be
owned by participants in this research.  Many respondents make extensive
use of their digital cameras, primarily for personal reasons, but sometimes
for business purposes as well.

Personal use of digital cameras typically centers on taking pictures of
family and friends, at gatherings ranging from milestone events to informal
get-togethers. Vacations represent another typical occasion for the use of
digital cameras.
Digital photos are considered easy to review (for quality), store, and
share.  This is particularly important to respondents living far from their
families and those with children or grandchildren.  Digital photos (and the
ability to e-mail them) play a critical role in connecting generations.
Some also feel digital photography provides a cost-effective alternative to
traditional photography because unwanted photos can be deleted immediately
and only the most important/appealing photos get printed.  The costs of
film and film processing are virtually eliminated.
At least one or two respondents in each group note they also use their
digital cameras for work or other commercial purposes.  Examples of photos
taken for these purposes include:  events covered in freelance news
stories, items to be sold on eBay, the condition of rental properties, and
students presenting their school projects.
"I take a lot of pictures.  I have a digital camera that takes still
pictures and movies, and I e-mail them.  I have a lot of family and friends
out of the area, so I e-mail a lot of pictures and random stuff, mostly
just for fun."  (San Diego female)
"I usually use the digital camera for pleasure, you know, take pictures of
the family, grandkids, vacations, sightseeing on vacations.  And I like the
instant images that come back, I can delete them, take them over, whatever
the case is.  Then I can send them to whomever I want later."  (Boston
male)
"My son just got married last weekend, so needless to say I took a lot of
pictures last weekend."  (San Diego male)
"The digital camera became a big money saver.  My wife likes to take a lot
of pictures and most of them are really bad.  So the digital camera is real
nice, because I told her she can take all the pictures she wants and if she
doesn't like them, just throw them away.  It saves a lot of money on film
and developing."  (San Diego male)
"We got my digital camera around the time my half-sister was born and we
always see her doing funny things, making funny faces or putting food on
her face, so we take pictures of that.  My mother's side of the family
lives in Korea, we can send them pictures of my baby sister.  My
grandfather actually hasn't seen her in person yet, but he knows what she
looks like because of the photos we send."  (Boston male)
"I have some rentals, so I use my digital cameras to take pictures of them
for business reasons."  (San Diego female)
"I do freelance work on the side, in addition to my regular job.  I
actually e-mail photos for stories I'm working on and things like that, so
that's another way I use my digital camera."  (Boston male)

4.    Digital video camcorders are most likely to be owned by families
raising children.

Some respondents across the focus groups (and many of the families
participating in the IDIs) own video camcorders.  In nearly all instances
the key motivation for owning this equipment is to chronicle the growth and
development of children, along with their participation in various
activities.  In some cases, middle and high school students use video
camcorders for school assignments.  Isolated respondents use their
camcorder for work-related purposes, such as making a movie as part of a
project done in an elementary school.  Footage shot on camcorders is
typically saved as a record of family events/activities and shared with
family and friends living far away.
"The digital camcorder is something I'll try to use to make movies and send
them to family members that haven't seen the baby, and actually to create
movies for ourselves, so we can look back on them when the kids are grown."
 (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"I can put my homework assignment on video and take it to school and show
it instead of giving a report."  (San Diego female - IDI respondent)
"We used the video cam to record the school play I was in.  Then we put it
on a regular tape and you can watch it if you want."  (Boston female - IDI
respondent)
"We have a camcorder that we use at family parties, or at a sports events
the children participate in.  I don't really use it, my husband does most
of that.  It's nice to have those things for the children, when they're
older."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I did a pretty neat thing at school with making movies with a digital
camcorder and I'm having the kids put the music in and other different
things for a major study they're doing in science.  I would like to put it
on a CD and then be able to watch it on my computer."  (Boston female)

5.    Quite a few respondents across these focus groups and IDIs download
music from the internet, although only a few have MP3 players.

Many younger respondents (primarily those under 35, including teens
interviewed in the IDIs) download music from the Internet and then burn
CDs.  In most cases this is done as a leisure pursuit, to obtain everything
from current hits, to older music that is no longer available in retail
outlets, to opera.  One respondent in Boston (a music student), however,
downloads music so she can record herself playing in the context of a major
orchestra and then edits the resulting recording.
Only a few respondents in these focus groups have MP3 players, and only
isolated respondents have mini disc players.  The majority are downloading
music to their PCs and transferring it CDs.
"I like to find a lot of old records, sometimes you can't find them in
stores, but you can look them up on your computer, download, and put them
on a disc."  (San Diego female)
"Primarily, I listen to opera a lot, and music in general.  I tune into
radio stations around the country and I download music a lot."  (Boston
female)
"I'm a music major, so I use my computer all the time to download music.
Then I record myself playing with the orchestra, and I have a bunch of
programs on my computer to edit stuff, I mean the music recordings.  I use
it a lot.  It's pretty much my life."  (Boston female)
"I like to download music.  My brother does it, too.  We both use Kazaa, I
guess I'm not supposed to talk about that, but we download it and then put
it on CDs and take it with us wherever."  (San Diego female IDI respondent)

6.    Some respondents in these focus groups also have PDAs, which are
often used primarily for work/business purposes, but sometimes for personal
reasons as well.

More male than female respondents use PDAs in both the Boston and San Diego
focus groups, although ownership of this technology is lower across the
board than the most popular technologies (e.g., computers, printers, and
digital cameras).  Most PDA users have them primarily for keeping schedules
and directories of names/addresses readily available.  The key application
is typically work-related.  A few respondents, however, use PDAs for
personal appointments and directories, or for playing games.
"I use my Palm to organize myself at work, but I wouldn't use it at home."
(Boston male - Early Adopter)
"With regard to the Palm, I use it for work, mostly medical programs like
for drug information and things like that.  I also use it for personal
organization, and keep phone numbers on it."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"I have a Palm that I use mostly for my businesses.  I keep information
related to my wellness business there, and then the insurance business."
(San Diego male)
"I use my Palm Pilot just to kind of sync up with my schedule and kind of
work schedule and phone books and that kind of stuff, also e-mails.  I kind
of link it all together and use it that way."  (Boston female)
"My Palm Pilot was supposed to be professional, but I just stick to the
games."  (San Diego female)

B.  Transfer of Digital Data


1.    Many respondents in these focus groups and IDIs claim that
transferring digital data is very important to them.  San Diego respondents
and Boston Early Adopters are more likely to consider this activity "very
important" than others.

Transferring digital information appears particularly important to younger
respondents (who consider it a hobby/leisure activity) and those who rely
on digital photos (and e-mail) as a means of keeping in touch with friends
and relatives.  It is also very important to those who are transferring
data for work or professional reasons.  The speed and ease with which these
respondents can transfer data makes it very appealing.
Older respondents (particularly those in Boston) are generally reluctant to
say transferring digital data is not important to them, but several make
statements indicating they have limited digital technology (often for
financial reasons) and that they are in the habit of working around their
limitations. This may include using outside resources for some things (like
putting photos on a website) or switching back and forth between digital
and other forms of communication.
"To me it's really important.  I like to download music.  I like putting
the pictures on the computer.  It's fun, quick and easy."  (Boston male --
IDI respondent)
"See to me, it's nice, but I don't do that much of the transferring myself.
 My sons do it for me.  If they couldn't do it, I would probably just not
do so much with the camera.  My husband doesn't get involved with the
technology at all."  (Boston female -- mother of above-quoted IDI
respondent)
"It's very important, not just in my household, but at school, too.  Emma's
my best friend, who is like 'oh you have to see this picture' and just
being able to send it to her right away is important, just missing the
moments with each other.  Or even, the music, it's like 'you have to hear
this song.'"  (Boston female)
"It's really important to me.  I record myself all the time, along with
concerts and what not.  I need to transfer that data into my computer, so I
can put it on a CD, or transfer it from a certain device to my computer for
editing and whatnot."  (Boston female)
"It's very important.  Like I said, I take a lot of pictures that I e-mail
to family because my family is not in the area.  And I really like my
digital camera because I can easily move pictures from my camera to the
computer.  It's quick and easy and I can e-mail a picture in a minute."
(San Diego female)
"I use both regular film, and I just bought a digital camera not long ago.
Part of the digital is that you have to learn it.  But if I'm using a non-
digital technique, like a film camera, I will have that developed by
somebody who will put them up on the web for me, so that I can send them or
have the kids look at them and then buy prints if they want it.  I read
regular newspapers too, not just the ones online."  (Boston female)
"I think it's really important, but I've run into snags between older Macs.
 I got rid of all my older Macintosh equipment because it has serial port
technology vs. USB ports.  And so a digital camera wouldn't work with that
and I had to get a special card reader and tape the memory, a smart media
card had to be used to read it and it would take two or three days to
download a picture.  Investing in this gets expensive."  (Boston male)

2.    Digital data is transferred by various means, depending on what type
of data it is and the available resources.  Photos are most likely to be
transferred via some type of cable or wire link, although a few respondents
transfer photos by moving memory cards.

Photos are the most commonly transferred type of digital data (after
documents, which were not discussed extensively in the research).  Most
respondents who transfer photos (in both focus groups and IDIs) are doing
so via a cable connection between their digital camera and computer.  A few
respondents (particularly in San Diego) transfer photos by moving a memory
card from their digital camera to a "card reader," which is wired to their
computer.  Isolated respondents report they can put their memory card
directly into their printer.  In contrast, one or two respondents claim
they take a "floppy" from the camera to transfer photos into their
computer.
"I connect the camera to the computer with a cord that goes into a USB
port.  The icon just comes up on the screen and I press it.  When I'm done
I just disconnect it."  (Boston male - IDI respondent)
"I just have a pretty simple camera that you just, you plug it in, it's a
USB kind of thing, and there's just a few steps that you're prompted
through.  I mean, you almost can't make a mistake if you just follow the
instructions."  (Boston male)
"I just have this little disk in the camera, it's a small square, that you
put into an adapter that's like, hooked up to the computer and then the
icon appears and you click on it, and it's done."  (Boston male)
"I do it [transfer photos] with a memory card.  You plug in the reader, you
stick a memory card in, and it just pops up on my computer.  It's
beautiful."  (San Diego female)
"From my camera to the computer I use the USB cable.  It's pretty easy.  My
printer actually has a memory card slot, so you can take the card out of
the camera and put it in the printer and there's a little screen, so I
don't have to turn the computer on if I just want to print out a picture
real quick.  Most of the time, though I do transfer them to the computer
first."  (San Diego male)
"My camera has a floppy.  I just pull it out of the camera and slide it
into the computer."  (San Diego male)

3.    Comparatively few respondents transfer video, and those who do are
primarily living in family households.

Transfer of video footage is most commonly done by connecting a video
camcorder to a VCR (via a cable) and transferring the footage to VHS tapes.
 A few respondents also report they download movies via the Internet or
transfer them from VHS tapes and then burn them onto CDs.
"I use both my digital camera and my camcorder.  With the camcorder, I hook
it up to the VCR, which takes the images from the camera and puts it on VHS
tapes."  (San Diego female)
"We take a lot of videos of our children, but I'm not the one who transfers
them.  My husband, when he has time, will hook up the camcorder to the VCR
and transfer what we recorded.  Then we save it on tapes."  (Boston female
- IDI respondent)
"When I downloaded The Hulk the other night, I'm eventually going to put it
on a CD.  I don't have a DVD recorder or anything like that."  (San Diego
male)
"We make digital movies all the time, like from VHS.  We have a program
where you can plug one end into your USB port in your computer.  The other
end has audio and video jacks and you can plug in into a VCR.  That way it
comes right up on your computer.  Then you can just record what you want
and it all comes onto a CD."  (San Diego male)

4.    Transfer of music is primarily a matter of downloading from the
Internet onto a PC, and then burning CDs.

Respondents with MP3 players report linking their MP3s to their computer
via USB cables.  Only respondents with more specialized applications (e.g.,
music students) become involved in more complex music transfer.
"I download music all the time.  Music takes up so much space on the
computer that I really have to transfer it to CDs pretty quick.  Then I
listen to the music on my CD player."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I use the USB port for both my MP3 player and my digital camera.  I just
plug it in and the program automatically comes up on my computer, so it's
very easy."  (San Diego female)
"I download music through a dial-up and it's very slow.  I have iTune and I
have iCard and it does it itself.  You put it into the iTune and then to
get it out to the iCard there's just one Firewire.  It goes directly from
the iCard into the computer and once you plug it in, it does it all on its
own."  (Boston female)
"For me, it's complicated.  I take my mini-disc player that I've recorded
like with a microphone, and I plug it into the computer, or I can take the
headphone jack on the mini-disc and plug the other end into the line-in on
my computer.  And then I need to have a program to record your data onto
the computer, so I press record and then let it play through or transfer,
depending on what program you have.  Once it's saved on the computer then I
need to open up another program to edit and change it into a different
format, and then I burn it onto a CD."  (Boston female)

5.    A few respondent report they have local area networks in their
households and occasionally use them to transfer digital information.
Wireless transfer of digital data is only done with PDAs.

Few respondents have established home networks and fewer still report they
use the networks to actively transfer digital data.  Isolated households
composed of young adults (college-age or a little older) do say they share
digital information through their household computer networks.
"I could transfer between my computers because I'm networked throughout my
house.  But I don't usually do that."  (San Diego male)
"I have a network in my house.  I have one drive and I save everything on
that.  The other drive I use for other things, but I save all my pictures
on the one drive."  (Boston male)
"We have all of our computers networked together.  Because we all go to
school, so we each have a computer.  We can go through Cox or Computer net.
 Like our main computer is like the hub, and then all of our other
computers are connected to the main computer, so we can share stuff."  (San
Diego female)
"I've used a beam from one organizer to transfer to another organizer.
That's wireless."  (Boston male)
"The only wireless transfer I've ever done is from Palm to Palm."  (San
Diego male)

6.    Participants in this research generally agree it is quick and easy to
transfer digital information from one technology to another.  Some also
appreciate the ability to modify what they have transferred and the speed
with which they can have access to photos and music.

Respondents generally feel transferring digital material is an easy and
efficient process, once the initial set-up work has been done.  Photos are
considered particularly easy to transfer and that appeals to many
respondents who do not consider themselves very technically sophisticated.
As noted earlier, most users simply connect their digital cameras to their
computers with a USB cable and click on an icon to transfer their pictures.
 Isolated respondents note this is particularly satisfactory when the
process is compared to the time and money involved in having film
developed.  In addition, images in the computer can be changed and
manipulated to satisfy individual needs or tastes.
"It's fail safe, quick, and there aren't a lot of bells and whistles to it.
 Simple."  (Boston male)
"It's easy to do it.  Mostly I just transfer pictures.  You just have to
connect the camera to the computer and then click.  The computer takes care
of the rest.  I don't really understand why some people have such a hard
time."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"It's fairly simple, once you get it set up."  (San Diego male)
"It's just like it's fast and it's easy and it keeps everything simple.
It's easy to make a CD and easy to download the CD and see the pictures.
I'm not even very technical."  (San Diego female)
"I like that you can move the pictures to the computer fast and then send
them to your friends fast on e-mail."  (San Diego female - IDI respondent)
"I like the ability to adjust the images and to modify them."  (Boston
male)
"When you think about how long it used to take to bring in the film and get
it developed and all that.  This is just, I mean, quick and easy."  (San
Diego female)

7.    While many respondents are very satisfied with the process they use
to transfer digital information (particularly photos), others express
concerns about equipment purchases, multi-step processes with poorly
written instructions, difficulty transferring photos when away from home,
and dissatisfaction with the quality of photos.

Satisfied respondents have typically become accustomed to a procedure and
see no specific reason to change it.  In contrast, some respondents voice
concerns about the amount of equipment they need to effect transfers and
the lack of sufficient USB ports on their computers to use several
peripherals simultaneously.  The need to invest more in equipment in order
to fully utilize what they already have is a financial hardship for some.
Another concern voiced by several respondents (particularly those who are
older or non-native English speakers) is that the processes for
transferring data can involve several steps and directions are not always
written clearly and simply.  A few respondents are frustrated by
difficulties getting photos into their computers (and off their memory
cards) while traveling.  Finally, a few respondents are dissatisfied with
the length of time it takes to download music and how much memory it takes
on their hard drive.
"When something you're trying to do doesn't work well and you have to go
out and buy another piece of equipment, or when you have to upgrade
something because it doesn't communicate well with something else.  It just
never ends and a lot of times I just have to wait until I can afford it"
(Boston female)
"I'm a landscaper trying to raise three daughters, so you know it can be
tough to keep up with it all.  It seems there's always something new you
have to have to use something else you already have, or if you want to do
something extra, well it's just more money."  (San Diego male - IDI
respondent)
"For all of us elderly people who started late with the technology, it's a
lot harder.  I mean, the younger generation started in school, pretty much
in the first or second grade, so they keep advancing.  But for me, I have
to keep reading.  Sometimes the instructions get a little dull.  I put it
down and then I might go back."  (San Diego male)
"I think my wife, I mean every time she wants to print a photo off of the
disc, she always have problem going through all these steps, and every time
I have to teach her how to do it, and she forget most of the time.  We have
to do it all over again every time.  It should be easier."  (Boston male)
"I was visiting in Ohio and taking pictures.  And the memory card, and it's
a pretty big memory card and its full.  They had computers so I downloaded
it in the computer, but the problem was I went out and took some more
pictures and then I couldn't get the stuff that was in the computer back to
San Diego.  The pictures were too big to put on a disc."  (San Diego
female)
"I don't like thinking there's only so many pictures, when I'm traveling,
unless I have a place to transfer them to my computer."  (Boston male -
Early Adopter)
"I'm having problems with downloading music.  Sometimes I've successfully
downloaded things, but then I've had trouble and I've sort of, you know
given up on it.  And I'm not sure if it's just the software program I have
of if it's the fact that you're downloading a lot of information when
you're trying to download a recording.  You want it to be quick and let's
face it the longer it takes the more chance you've got of being cut off by
your ISP."  (Boston male)
"Music takes up a lot of space on your computer.  I'm always having to put
it on CDs, because there just isn't enough memory in our computer.
Something else we'll have to bump up sometime."  (San Diego female - IDI
respondent)

8.    One solution to digital data transfer problems suggested by a few
respondents across the focus groups is to develop a wireless capability.

A few respondents (who are not all dissatisfied with how they personally
transfer digital data) note that, in the longer term, wireless transmission
should be the goal.  This will impact the time and amount of equipment it
takes to transfer digital data, as well as dealing with some distance
constraints.  Some other respondents in these groups agree wireless
transmission sounds simpler and might be an answer to their concerns about
the large number of wires their computer equipment already entails.
"I think we definitely need some sort of remoting capability.  When I
reflect back to the first remote VCRs, they were hard-wired.  You had a
button that you pushed attached to a six food cord and now we got infrared
technology and other kinds of things that we can use, even like a PDA to
share information back and forth."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"That would be a big step forward and get rid of the extra equipment and
wires."  (Boston male - Early Adopter -- responding to above comment)
"If there was a way we could just eliminate the link to the worldwide web,
I mean a really effective, fast method to just have that computer instant
on anywhere, that would be a lovely thing.  Just do it all from anywhere."
(San Diego male)
"Too many wires and cords all over the damn house everywhere, get rid of
all the wires!  Do it without wires."  (Boston male)

9.    Respondents living in family households often report that not
everyone in their household is involved in transferring digital data.  In
contrast, respondents living in households of unrelated individuals often
say all or most household members transfer digital data.

Family members participating in both focus groups and IDIs frequently
report that transferring digital data is not handled by everyone in the
household.  Often, one of the heads of household has more interest in
technology and either handles digital data transfer, or is learning how to
do this from one of the teenage/young adult children.  Several male
respondents (particularly in San Diego) report their wives have no interest
in these activities.  However, a few mothers participating in the Boston
IDIs report their husbands have no interest in, or knowledge of,
technology.  In most family households with teens or young adults, at least
one member of the younger generation participates in data transfer.
In contrast, younger respondents living in households composed of their
peers are more likely to report that everyone in the household transfers
digital information.  In some cases these respondents report they share
technology resources within the household.  Young, professional, married
couple households often fit into this same pattern and are different from
their middle-aged and older counterparts.
"My dad doesn't do anything with computers.  He doesn't know a thing about
them."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I'm trying to learn how to do the transferring from her [daughter], but
it's taking me awhile.  Still, I'm going to keep doing it until I get it."
(Boston female - mother of above-quoted IDI respondent)
"My wife doesn't play with this at all.  I do it."  (Boston male)
"My sons do most of it, I'm trying to learn, and my husband is just too
busy to be bothered with it.  I don't think he'll ever get into it."
(Boston female - IDI respondent)
"We all do everything.  We're college kids and we just love this stuff.  We
have all our computers networked, like I told you, and we're always trading
stuff, downloading, moving it around."  (San Diego male)
"My father, my older sister, and I do the transferring of stuff.  My
younger sister's not into it yet, and my mother isn't interested in
technology.  Maybe we'll get her interested someday, but not yet."  (San
Diego female - IDI respondent)
"My wife and I both do some, although I think I do a little more than she
does.  She's more into the administrative side of things, like selling
stuff on eBay and planning our move."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"My kids are too small and my wife, she's just not interested in it.  She
thinks it's complicated.  She just doesn't give the time to learn, because
it's actually pretty easy."  (San Diego male)

10.   Most respondents living in households where some others shy away from
transferring digital material feel the best inducement for involving other
household members would be simplifying the process.

Some respondents living in households where not everyone transfers digital
information claim it would be difficult to involve others in this activity
due to time constraints, or a basic lack of experience with technology.
Many, however, feel that simpler procedures involving fewer steps would
induce others in their household to undertake the activity.  In some cases,
uninvolved household members have tried to transfer data, but quit in
frustration over the time and complexity they feel the process involves.
"With my mother, I don't know, it's hard to say.  She's a nurse and maybe
if they incorporated more computer things in her work, she'd get more
comfortable with it and try to do it."  (San Diego female)
"Just simplify everything.  My wife, she doesn't want to get involved with
the wires and forget all the instructions."  (San Diego male)
"It's not really that hard, I don't think.  I just don't have the time to
go through all the little steps, and the kids do have more of that kind of
time.  So I want to do it, but there's a lot of steps and so I just take
the pictures and let my sons put them in.  My husband's just too busy."
(Boston female - IDI respondent)

C.  Storage of Digital Data


1.    Most respondents use their computer's hard drive as storage for their
digital photos.  Some respondents transfer photos to CDs, either as a back
up or because they do not have adequate space on their hard drive.

Digital camera users in these focus groups and IDIs typically store their
photos on their computer's hard drive because they feel this is a safe and
easily accessible location.  Most respondents simply create file folders
labeled with information that will help them recognize what photos are in
that folder.  A few respondents claim they are so new to digital
photography that they have not yet had a need to move their photos from the
camera's memory card.  CDs are the preferred medium for additional/longer
term storage of photos.  They are perceived to be easy to use, reliable,
inexpensive, and easy to label.  Isolated respondents report they sometimes
save photos that are sent to them in e-mail files on ISP servers.
"My camera has a one gigabyte IBM micro drive which holds like 800 pictures
at high resolution at 3.3 megapixels, so that's where the photos start out.
 And then I've got a 12 gigabyte hard drive in my computer to transfer them
to, and that's about the end of that story."  (San Diego male)
"You want your pictures on a CD.  At least that's where I feel the most
secure for the long run.  And they're cheap, you can get them for 20 cents
each sometimes."  (Boston male)
"Our pictures go from the camera, when we run out of space, to the
computer.  I keep them in files and they're easy to find and you can just
label them with what the pictures are about."  (Boston female - IDI
respondent)
"If it's like photos and a lot pictures of art work that my son has done,
then I'll transfer that to a CD and then I'll just delete if off the hard
drive because it's like an album for my family."  (San Diego female)
"To be honest I haven't taken enough pictures on my new digital to have to
move them.  I was just going to move them to my computer, at least until I
get so many pictures I have to do something else."  (Boston female)
"Mine [photos] are mostly saved on my computer.  But I'm thinking I have to
find somewhere else to put them because they take up too much space.  I
keep taking more pictures, but I don't want to delete the old ones, I want
to save them so I probably will put them on a disc, a CD.  But I haven't
gotten around to it yet."  (Boston female)
"I keep pictures either on the computer, on a CD, or a lot times when I get
pictures from friends I just save them on Yahoo, and they have a little
briefcase thing for you, so I just save them there and they're kind of
oscillating on someone else's computer."  (Boston female - Early Adopter)

2.    Music downloaded from the Internet is typically transferred to CDs
(unless a respondent has a MP3 player) to save space on the hard drive.

Few respondents in these groups have MP3 players, and many younger
respondents enjoy downloading music.  Most agree music files are very
large, taking up considerable hard drive space.  The need to free-up hard
drive space and the desire to take music with them leads many respondents
who download music to burn CDs and delete the music from the hard drive.
"I have to move the music I download off the computer because it doesn't
have that much memory.  I just put it on CDs."  (Boston female - IDI
respondent)
"I keep my music on CDs.  After I download it, I burn the CDs, delete it
from the computer, and then I can have it to take with me."  (San Diego
male)
"I use Kazaa to download music and I put it on CDs.  You can fit a lot of
songs on a CD.  I don't have a MP3."  (San Diego female)

3.    Respondents store most video by transferring it to VHS tapes.  A few
respondents have transferred video to CDs, and isolated respondents store
video on their hard drive.

As noted earlier, camcorder users typically transfer their footage from the
camera to a VHS tape, where it can be stored or copied and shared with
others.  A few respondents use CDs for storing video, but some others
consider this too limiting because it must be viewed on the computer.
Isolated respondents who download movies to their computers, will then move
them to a CD to free up space on their hard drives.
"The videos we take just get moved to tapes.  My husband hooks the
camcorder up to the VCR and makes a tape."  (Boston female - IDI
respondent)
"The videos we do, like of stuff at school or sports, or whatever just get
put on tapes."  (San Diego female - IDI respondent)
"I'll download movies sometimes, even if it really takes a long time and
then put them on CDs.  I don't have enough memory, really, to just let them
sit on my computer."  (San Diego male)

4.    No one in these focus groups uses memory cards for permanent storage
of any digital data.

If specifically asked about this issue, respondents who have any
familiarity with memory cards indicate they are too expensive to be used
for permanent storage purposes.  In addition, some fear such a small device
is difficult to label and can be easily lost, making it less than ideal for
storage of family photos or videos.
"No, I wouldn't use a memory card for that.  I have the little card in my
camera and it just stores the pictures until I feel like downloading them.
They're too expensive to keep buying, so it's easier to just download the
pictures and reuse the empty."  (San Diego male)
"Memory cards hold a lot, but they're really small.  I wouldn't want to use
something that little, for stuff I don't want to misplace or lose.  I think
I could lose one of them."  (Boston female)
"The memory card is just in the camera.  That's where mine stays.  It just
kind of keeps the pictures until you move them to the computer.  If I
recall, they're pretty expensive.  I wouldn't store anything on them
because I'd rather use it again."  (Boston male)

5.    Respondents generally report few digital information storage
problems.  Running out of space on their computers and having a large
number of CDs or tapes to store are the issues mentioned most often.

Most respondents do not consider storing digital information to be a
significant issue.  Several respondents indicate they either have multiple
hard drives or a large amount of memory to accommodate their storage needs.
 Some, however, feel they are beginning to run out of space on their hard
drive and have started to move photos to CDs.  While CDs are considered
small enough to be easily stored, a few respondents acknowledge that they
do not always label them as carefully as they should or keep them organized
for easy retrieval.  VHS tapes, used to store video footage, do take up
more storage space than a few respondents would like.  Others, however,
note both tapes and CDs actually hold a great deal of material.
"The pictures, I load them on to the hard drive.  I think I've got 40
gigabytes or something, and then sometimes I back them up onto CDs just to
be sure I have them in another place.  I don't really have a problem."
(San Diego female)
"Mine [photos] are mostly saved on my computer.  But I'm thinking I have to
find somewhere else to put them because they take up too much space.  I
keep taking more pictures, but I don't want to delete the old ones, I want
to save them so I probably will put them on a disc, a CD.  But I haven't
gotten around to it yet."  (Boston female)
"We have a lot of tapes that are starting to take up a lot of room, but
that's what we do."  (San Diego female - IDI respondent)
"I label all my CDs with a CD marker, which works great if you remember to
do it.  But I am starting to have a lot of CDs, which I'll have to get
organized sometime, just to be able to find them when I need something."
(Boston male)
"I've actually put a CD with photos onto CD players thinking that there's
music on it, and not understood why there are no tracks.  So I've learned
to put a name on them, but that doesn't always happen."  (Boston female)

D.  Digital Technology Information Sources


1.    Respondents in these focus groups rely on many different sources of
information to learn about developments in digital technology.  The most
frequently cited source is word-of-mouth recommendations.

Many digital technology users in these focus groups and IDIs rely on the
advice of friends, family members, and co-workers who they perceive to be
knowledgeable about the field.  Informal sources are important because
their judgment is known and trusted by the user of the information.  In
addition, they often provide an opportunity to see a technology being used,
or to learn about the experience of using a technology from someone with
similar needs.
Younger respondents note that discussions about technology are common among
their peers and with teachers at school.  Parents participating in the IDIs
indicate they often rely on what their children have learned from these
informal sources as a starting point for decisions about purchases and the
overall direction of technology.
"When it really comes down to it, I really don't know much about what's
going on, but word of mouth through friends helps.  Like I didn't know
about digital cameras until my friend got one and was so excited about it.
I saw hers and then got one myself."  (Boston female)
"One thing that I depend on is just other friends or relatives who are
ahead of me.  If they're too far ahead of me, I figure OK, I'll just wait
for somebody else."  (Boston male)
"My boss just loves trying new things that come out.  He orders it and he
shows us what he bought and if we can use it in the office that's great, or
sometimes it's stuff you can use at home."  (San Diego male)
"We talk about stuff at school all the time.  My friends and I are always
talking about what's new and what's what.  Some of my teachers are really
into it too, and the school gets new things sometimes."  (Boston male - IDI
respondent)
"The kids bring home a lot of information.  They're talking to their
friends and in the school, they have stuff they're working on, so they come
and tell me what they're hearing.  We can't keep up with everything, but
it's one way to keep up on what's new -- with all the changes that are
always going on."  (San Diego male - IDI respondent)

2.    Another very important source of information is the Internet.  Many
respondents go online to learn about new products or to get additional
information about products they may already be using.

The Internet is considered by many as a natural source of information about
technology, both through advertising, information on manufacturer websites,
and independent publications (e.g., Consumer Reports, CD.net) that can be
found there.  Most respondents cannot identify specific websites they
typically visit (other than independent rating sources), but often say they
simply initiate a search and then follow various links.
"Basically what I do is go on the Internet and find out about a product and
go to a store to test drive it.  I do the price comparisons on the
Internet, but I'd rather buy it from a store so I can see it."  (Boston
male)
"Sometimes I go to particular websites or if I'm interested in something,
I'll just put that into like Google and whatever comes up is where I go."
(Boston male)
"I usually go to CD.net, where you can basically see a review of anything
electronic, and they break it down into the best of this or the best of
this, and they rate them based on everything so I usually go there."  (San
Diego male)
"I go to Consumer Reports, you can see it online.   They have good
information that I can understand."  (San Diego female)
"I go to Microsoft.com a lot."  (San Diego male)

3.    Some respondents consider consumer electronics retailers and computer
stores to be good sources of information, but others do not.  Still, most
note they ultimately go to local stores to see the products of interest to
them.

Some respondents, including several who describe themselves are relatively
unsophisticated; consider the employees at retailers selling digital
technology as an important source of information.  Others, however, feel
retail outlet employees are poorly trained and lack knowledge about the
products they sell.  Whatever their opinions about the employees, a large
majority of respondents visits retail outlets to see the products of
interest to them and, often, to obtain answers they have not been able to
find through other means.
"Usually I ask the salesman.  I ask them how to use it and all the
information.  I mean, it's just easier for me to hear it from a person."
(San Diego female)
"We go into the stores sometimes to see the things we're interested in and
talk to the people.  Someplace like Best Buy or Circuit City.  Usually, my
sons already know something before we go in, but I like to ask the people
their questions and to see how it works."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"Yeah, I go online, but I also go to brick and mortar stores like
MicroCenter or even Staples or Best Buy, different stores to see what's
supposedly up and coming.  The people selling it don't usually know
anything much about the stuff, but at least you can see it."  (Boston male)
"No way would I believe anything the people in the store tell me.  The
don't know the difference between a tire and a computer."  (San Diego male)

4.    Mass media sources of information (e.g., newspapers, magazines, and
television) are used by some respondents.  Mail order catalogues serve as a
source of information for some others.

A few respondents in both Boston and San Diego rely on their local
newspapers as an important source of information regarding technology
developments.  Columns about personal technology are considered
particularly useful.  Isolated respondents also rely on The Wall Street
Journal for this purpose.  Magazines (such as PC Magazine and Consumer
Reports) are a source of information to some.  While Consumer Reports is
widely acclaimed, isolated respondents consider computer magazines too
advanced for their needs.  Isolated respondents indicate they rely on
television advertising or catalogues as a source of information.
"I learn a lot from the Boston Globe.  Hiawatha Bray is one of the
columnists who does a really good job in talking about the latest
technology."  (Boston male)
"I read about it in the Union on Mondays in that Personal Technology
section.  They always tell you about what's the latest and whatever, and
people talk about."  (San Diego female)
"Well, sometimes a lot of the TV commercials have updated technologies that
you might not know about.  There's been a lot of that lately."  (Boston
female)
"We get Consumer Reports and that has very good information with good
comparisons."  (San Diego male)
"There's a Dell catalogue we get in the mail that I get ideas from.  They
don't tell you much, but you can see what's there and then get other
information if you want.  My kids look through it too."  (Boston female -
IDI respondent)
"Newspapers like The Wall Street Journal, PC Magazine, and then the
internet."  (San Diego male)
"I'm actually very intimidated by the computer magazines.  Like if I have
to open up PC Today or PC Magazine, whatever, it's just too much for me
because I don't understand a lot of it so I wish there was an easy method
of getting it because all I get information from is just talking to people
who are whizzes about it."  (Boston male)

II.  Current Usage and Impressions of Memory Cards


A.  Usage of Memory Cards


1.    Awareness and usage of memory cards vary across the focus groups and
IDIs.  Boston Early Adopters and younger respondents in all groups/ IDIs
are most likely to be aware of memory cards, as are users of digital
cameras.

In most groups, about half of respondents report they currently use a
memory card.  Usage is nearly universal in the group of Boston Early
Adopters and in one of the San Diego groups.  San Diego parents and
children participating in the IDIs are more aware of/knowledgeable about
memory cards than their Boston counterparts.  In Boston, some parents
appeared to be unaware of memory cards (at least until they were described
in the discussion).
A few digital camera users across the focus groups initially seem unaware
that their cameras use memory cards as the means to store the photos they
take (although they do know their camera has some type of memory).  Some
are new to digital cameras and have not transferred photos from the camera.
"I just got my camera, and I know it has some kind of memory, but I don't
know how it works or what it really is yet -- until I start getting into
this more."  (Boston female)
"I just take pictures and then, when I want to do something, the friend
that lives with us, he puts them on the computer or whatever, so I can see
them or do things."  (San Diego female)

2.    Many respondents cannot say what brand of memory card they are
currently using.

Respondents using the Sony Memory Stick appear most confident in
identifying the brand they use and often note it can be used in any Sony
product.  Some respondents report they use the Compact Flash or Smart Media
cards, and isolated respondents report using the SD Memory Card.  Many
respondents, however, have no idea what memory card they use.
"Sony has something called the Memory Stick and you can use it any Sony
product.  I have it in my camera and in my PDA, I could put it in a
camcorder.  That's just how Sony works."  (Boston male)
"As I mentioned earlier I use the memory card for the Olympus camera.  It's
called Smart Media."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"I use a Compact Flash memory card, I think that's the only one you can use
with the Cannon camera."  (San Diego male)
"I know the camera uses a memory card, and I know where it goes, but I
don't know what kind it is."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I don't know, we just kind of get them when we need them."  (Boston male)
"I don't know what it's called and I just had to buy a bigger one.  But I
can't remember the name."  (San Diego female)
"I use the SD card, which is smaller than the others.  The reason I got the
SD card is because its small and when we go on vacation the last thing I
want to do is carry a bunch of cards."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)

3.    Respondents using memory cards most commonly report they use them in
their digital cameras and/or PDAs.

Most respondents are using memory cards with digital cameras or PDAs.
Those who have MP3 players also use them for that application.  Only a few
respondents mention using memory cards in video camcorders (including
isolated mentions of the SD Memory Card).
'"My husband uses the memory card in his camera, that's about it."  (San
Diego female)
"I just have the one that's in the PDA, which I use because there's more
programs that fit in the memory."  (San Diego male)
"My MP3 uses a memory card, so I use it there for music.  The camera uses
one, too.  I don't think we have anything else at home that needs it."
(Boston male - IDI respondent)
"I try to stay compatible, so I have the SD.  My camcorder uses it, my
camera uses it, and my Palm uses it."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"Sony does that, I think you can use theirs with all Sonys.  So if it's in
your camcorder you could take it out and put in your Sony TV."  (Boston
female - Early Adopter)

4.    Most users of memory cards in digital cameras never remove their
memory card from the camera, since all transferring of images is done
through a cable connection.

Only a few respondents across the focus groups report they transfer digital
photos by moving their memory card into a reader/adapter vs. leaving the
memory card in the camera and connecting the camera and computer via
cables.  Similarly, only isolated respondents report they move their memory
card directly to a printer.
"I have a digital camera and whatnot, but every time I use it, my cousin
has to come over and help me with it.  I've already ruined three memory
cards because I couldn't get them into the slot right."  (Boston female)
"I have the capacity to take it [memory card] out of my camera and put it
directly into my printer.  Occasionally I do that."  (San Diego male)
"My card just always stays in the camera.  I don't know why I'd want to
move it."  (Boston male)
"There's a card in the camera, where the pictures stay until you transfer
them, but like I said, I just hook up the camera to the computer with the
USB and that's it.  The card's always in the camera."  (San Diego female)

B.  Advantages of Memory Cards


1.    Respondents currently using memory cards feel this medium has several
advantages.  One advantage mentioned very frequently is the small size, and
associated portability, of the cards.

Nearly all memory card users in these focus groups and IDIs note the small
size of the memory card makes it very portable.  Many consider this useful
in travel situations and those who move their memory cards from one device
to another (a few respondents), also appreciate this quality on a day-to-
day basis.
"It's small, so you don't have to worry about going on vacation and
carrying 20 floppy discs around with you or something like that."  (San
Diego male)
"They're really small, so you can put them in your purse or even your
pocket, although you have to make sure you don't lose it if you do that.
You can take it with you easily."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"The nicest thing is that it's easy to carry them around.  It's not like a
bunch of film in a bag."  (San Diego female)

2.    Another positive feature of memory cards is that they come in various
capacities, allowing one memory card to potentially hold a great deal of
digital data.

Many memory card users across the groups and IDIs note memory cards can
hold a great deal of material, especially photos and music.  Quite a few
are aware memory cards have varying capacities, so that it is possible to
purchase large capacity cards which are physically the same size as smaller
capacity cards.  Many find this convenient, since storing more data does
not require additional physical space on memory cards, in contrast to CDs
and tapes, which only come in one size.
"I really like mine because I can store like 900 pictures on the card."
(San Diego female)
"I think it's amazing how much information you can have on one of these
little discs.  They come in different sizes, too, so you can store more and
it'll still take the same amount of space, not like with CDs."  (San Diego
male)
"You can put a lot on a memory card, although the first one I had, that
came with the camera, couldn't handle hardly anything.  I had to go buy a
bigger one, a 128, but now I have room for a lot of pictures.  The first
one was an 8, or something like that, really tiny."  (Boston male)
"The memory card we have now is good because it'll store a lot of pictures.
 I can do something at school without running out of room, but I'm not sure
exactly how many pictures that is."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)

3.    The reusability of memory cards also appeals to many current users.

Many memory card users appreciate the ability to remove digital data from
the memory card and reuse it.  Digital photography users are particularly
appreciative of this, since they typically move photos to their computer
for storage, editing, and/or printing.
"Well, as far as my digital camera is concerned it's practically renewable.
 It's very usable.  I can keep taking pictures and erase it and go back and
use it over and over.  I use it millions of times.  I don't know if I'm
exaggerating, but I know I've used the same card many, many times."
(Boston male)
"You just move the pictures to your computer, so your card is like, empty,
and you can go out and take pictures again."  (San Diego female - IDI
respondent)
"Personally I have three memory cards and I'm using them for a year now.  I
have three memory cards that I use and you can format it over and over."
(Boston male)
"You can erase it and start over, no matter how many times.  You can't do
that with your regular CDs."  (San Diego male)

4.    A few respondents, primarily in the San Diego focus groups, feel
declining prices and versatility are advantages of the memory card.

A few memory card users in the San Diego area feel prices of memory cards
have declined in the past year, and consider this an important benefit.  In
addition, a few users feel a key advantage of memory cards is their ability
to be used with various technologies.  They appreciate the versatility of
being able to use the same card for photos, video, or in a Palm Pilot (for
example). These few respondents are using SD Memory Card of Sony Memory
Sticks.
"The price has really, really come down.  The first memory card I bought,
which was roughly four or five years ago, was I think four megabytes, and I
think it was $80.  And now I think its 28 megs for about $30.00."  (San
Diego male)
"I think I bought 256 meg cards for about $50, eight months ago.  I'm sure
its cheaper now."  (San Diego male)
"They're versatile.  You can put them in a computer -- really any computer,
and in digital cameras, and camcorders, and a lot of different stuff."
(San Diego male)
"The Sony card is very versatile.  You can use it any of their products --
their TV, digital camera, PDA, really anything they make.  I like that."
(Boston male)

C.  Disadvantages of Memory Cards


1.    Many users feel the memory card's small size is both an advantage (in
terms of portability) and a disadvantage because it makes the card easy to
misplace or break.

Memory card users in virtually all focus groups note that the card's small
size cuts both ways.  Many express concern about losing such a small
object, or even breaking it by inadvertently stepping on it.  A few
respondents also express concern that the memory card is a choking hazard
to small children or dogs.  These concerns do not appear to outweigh the
advantages of the memory card's small size.
"Those little things are easy to lose."  (Boston male)
"I worry a little about losing it, because it is so small that if you just
put it aside and it gets in with other things, you might not be able to
find it."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"Well, I think, the fact that they're so small they just lend themselves to
being broken, possibly, like they're not make of the best material.  It's
not like you're going to play football with them r anything.  But you could
step on one and conceivably break it."  (San Diego male)
"I have a 20 month old at home and you'd want to keep this away from where
a small child could get it because they put everything in their mouth.
Even a dog could get it off the floor."  (San Diego male)

2.    Memory card users who are aware that memory cards come in a variety
of formats find this to be a disadvantage.

While many respondents are uncertain about what brand of memory card they
use and unaware that various formats exist, more knowledgeable users
consider this a drawback.  A few note that other types of storage (e.g.,
CDs, tapes) come in a single format, making them more versatile.
"One of the standard complaints [about memory cards] is that they come in
different formats so you could end up with one card that works for your
PDA, but it's different than the one for your camera, which is different
than the one from your MP3 player."  (San Diego male)
"It's hard to stay compatible, because not everything uses the same kind of
memory card.  Even cameras use all different ones, which is annoying."
(Boston male - Early Adopter)
"There are many different types of memory cards out there.  There's no,
they haven't it gotten it down to a single memory type.  A CD is a CD, and
a floppy disc is a floppy disc, but that's not true for the memory card."
(San Diego male)

3.    Some memory card users mention either price or capacity as
disadvantages of memory cards.

The price of memory cards is an issue for some respondents across the focus
groups and IDIs.  Most users have purchased a larger capacity memory card
than the one that came with their digital cameras.  While many express no
particular concerns about the price, a few do.
Memory card capacity appears to be an issue primarily for less
knowledgeable respondents, who are frustrated by how many photos their
current memory cards can hold and not aware of how much more capacity they
can purchase.  However, isolated respondents who are knowledgeable note
that current memory cards would not be able to hold large quantities of
photos, along with either music or video.
"When we're talking prices, that's a disadvantage because if you're
somewhere traveling and you only have one card, it's going to get full, so
you either have to start erasing or you have to have extra cards, which
gets into money."  (San Diego male)
"I want us to get a bigger memory card, but we have to save up to get it.
They can be pretty expensive."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I think 128 megabytes is going to cost you around 90 or 100 bucks, and
that's noticeable."  (San Diego male)
"The reason I didn't choose one, is that they just don't hold enough.  I
wanted to be able to get a lot on there.  You know there's a huge
difference between 128 megs and a gigabyte, and so you know you can have
like a thousand pictures in your camera, large format, if you have the big
card, so that was the reason I had."  (San Diego male)
"Sometimes I find the size is a problem, like you have to delete pictures
because you run out of space.  I'd like them to do something about that."
(Boston female)
"Yeah, maybe you can put a lot of pictures on it, but if you put pictures,
music, and a movie on it, you're going to run out of space.  That's a
definite limitation."  (Boston male)

III.  Post-Demonstration Reactions to SD Memory Card


A.  Perceived Benefits


1.    After viewing the SD Memory Card demonstration, some respondents (in
both the focus groups and IDIs) clearly feel this product (and what it can
do) has a high "cool factor."

These respondents express appreciation for the variety of technologies that
can use the memory card -- and the entertainment they provide.  In
addition, they appreciate the speed and ease with which digital information
can be transferred from one technology to another.  The overall effect of
the demonstration is exciting and impressive.
"I just love the way you can go from one thing to another, so fast and
easy.  You can watch a program on that tiny, I guess it's like a television
set or whatever.  That is just so cool."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"It's very high tech.  I mean, just like every single thing he put it into
was really neat, but a little intimidating.  But personally, not everyone
owns all those things.  Still, it's neat."  (Boston female)
"I think it's fantastic.  It's so small and it holds more in a little space
and it fits in my camera, it's a very cool thing."  (Boston male)
"I love that little Panasonic that's a camera and plays it and everything.
It would take up no space traveling.  Excellent!"  (Boston male)
"This is really impressive.  It does so much on so many different things,
like the DVD and the printer and the Palm, it's really just amazing.  I
don't have all that stuff, but it's got my attention."  (San Diego male -
IDI respondent)
"This just astounds me!  I'm thinking you can take that little player that
he showed the basketball game on and record children's movies or shows on
it.  We always take a DVD player when we're going on the long flights to
visit my family, and this would be so much easier."  (San Diego female)

2.    A key benefit of SD Memory Cards communicated through the
demonstration is the card's ability to be used with many different types of
technologies.  This "versatility," as many respondents call it, sets the
card apart from others in the category.

Many respondents in both the focus groups and IDIs report being impressed
by the wide range of devices in which the SD Memory Card can be used.  Some
specifically note that their own memory cards appear to be useable in only
their digital cameras (and perhaps in their desktop computers).  Being able
to view the same images or video on various devices, using the same memory
card to move the material is considered convenient and efficient.
"What I like is that you can move the picture or whatever from one thing to
another using the same card.  I've never seen that before.  It works on a
printer and a laptop and small player, and all of this, which mine can't
do."  (Boston male - IDI respondent)
"I think it's great, just because it's kind of like you have one bridge
that connects everything because this works in everything -- as long as you
have that equipment."  (Boston male)
"I like the versatility because you get to do the computer with the
television.  I know you can still do it today, but it's a little bit harder
to do than with a little card.  You can use it in every little thing in
your house."  (San Diego female)
"You can use it on so many kinds of things, and I guess you can use it in
more than one brand."  (Boston female)
"So many different things can use this card.  I could take it to school and
maybe put my stuff into something we have there, because so many things can
use this."  (San Diego female - IDI respondent)

3.    Another advantage recognized by respondents across the groups and
IDIs is the SD Memory Card's small size, particularly in relation to the
amount of digital information it can store.

Actually seeing the memory card (with both a photo and video footage)
brought many respondents to a keen realization that it is able to hold a
large volume of different types of digital data, while being very portable.
 While current users of memory cards had already talked about the value of
their compact size in relation to the number of photos they can hold, the
novelty of seeing video footage stored on the memory card appears to
heighten both users' and non-users' awareness that the SD Memory Card has a
large capacity in relation to its size.  In addition, the small size of the
card makes it easy to transport various types of digital information
(including "regular" computer documents).
"It's such a small thing, but he showed that this file is big enough that
it will accommodate both the regular -- he used the same memory card for
the photograph and for the streaming video, and the file was big enough to
hold it."  (Boston female)
"I've never seen one of these [SD Memory Card] and it's even smaller than
the one I have.  But you can put so much on it with the photo and video of
the basketball game.  That's a lot on one card."  (Boston male - IDI
respondent)
"This card itself does the same thing as what I have now, but my card's a
little bit longer.  I don't understand this, this is only about half the
size of my card, and it does the same thing."  (San Diego male)
"The memory card in my camera is really small, but this is even smaller and
it seems to be able to hold so much with the video and the photo.  I wonder
if anything else could go on that or if it's already full?  Still, it's so
small and you can carry around so much on it."  (San Diego female)
"I think transporting information to, like a friend's house, you can take
it from your computer and actually take it over to their house and do your
book work or whatever.  I'm not talking so much about pictures, as much as
regular information off the computer, that I think is more important.  You
could put a lot on this small thing."  (San Diego female)
"For the majority of purposes for which you use it, you don't need more
than 128 megabytes.  It's certainly more convenient than trying to tote
around a CD-ROM or that kind of thing for exchanging files.  It's so much
smaller."  (San Diego male)

4.    Quite a few respondents feel the SD Memory Card could help them save
time in transferring digital information.  The process of doing so seems
quicker and easier than what they are currently doing.

In comparison to current methods of transferring digital information, many
current memory card users feel moving the card (vs. connecting one device
to another) is quicker and easier.  Some recognize this as a step in the
direction of wireless data transfer and are enthusiastic about that
eventuality.  Less sophisticated users (or those living in households where
others are intimidated by current processes) also note that moving a card
from one slot to another seems like a simple way to accomplish things they
currently shy away from doing.
"Well you don't have to sit there and burn the CD and wait for it to finish
for like 20 minutes.  This would definitely save time."  (Boston male)
"It looks really quick and easy, so if it's really like that we might be
able to get my father to think about this."  (Boston male - IDI respondent)
"Never mind Dad, maybe I would finally be able to feel confident about how
to do this and I wouldn't have to wait for you or your brothers to be able
to do it for me."  (Boston female - IDI respondent, commenting on above
remark)
"It's really fast.  If I had something that was bigger than like a floppy
disc, but I didn't want to waste time cutting a CD-ROM, but I wanted to
take like 100 megabytes off one computer and put it on another, it looks
like that might be able do it real fast.  Just walk up to the computer, pop
it in, transfer the information, walk to the next computer, pop it in and
transfer it again.  You didn't have to go through a big set up process for
a CD."  (San Diego male)
"My mother is just learning how to use the computer and she can create a
document, but can't send it to print.  If she had something like this and
could just move the card to the printer, I think she'd be able to do it and
it would give her a feeling of more control.  The whole idea is very
simple."  (San Diego female)
"I'm always asking other people to do things for me, like taking the
digital camera pictures.  I think, okay, I have to buy a camera, I have to
figure out how to get from the camera to the computer, from the computer to
there, and I think about all those steps and I think I don't want to do
that because there's always someone else who can do it for me.  But
something like this, OK, I could manage that, it seems very easy."  (San
Diego female)

5.    A few respondents, primarily in the San Diego focus groups, feel
another advantage of the SD Memory Card is that it could replace other
storage devices.

Reflecting on the card's small size and ease-of-use, a few respondents
conclude it may be feasible for them to replace CDs, tapes, and floppy
discs with the memory card.  Some respondents also feel the SD Memory Card
is less prone to damage than CDs, which is appealing to them.
"It seems like you would eliminate a lot of your other storage devices.  I
mean even taking off of TV with it, as long as you have the right equipment
you wouldn't need VCR tapes that are much bigger.  You wouldn't need
floppies or CD-ROMs because you can store everything on this.  You wouldn't
have to have lots of storage space for hundred of videocassettes or
whatever."  (San Diego female)
"You could use this and leave your hard drive for other information.  It
can store pictures, music, video, really everything and it's small."  (San
Diego male)
"You probably wouldn't have to worry about getting it scratched up, like
you do a CD.  They look pretty durable, so you might use them instead of
CDs."  (San Diego male)
"I like to listen to music when I run, and if I had the music on these
instead of on CDs, then it probably wouldn't skip the way CDs do."  (San
Diego female)

B.  Perceived Drawbacks


1.    The key perceived drawback of the SD Memory Card is the need for
users to have the equipment that allows them to take advantage of its
capabilities.

This issue arises in all focus groups and IDIs, but appears to be
particularly important to Boston respondents.  Many note they do not
currently own equipment that can accept the SD Memory Card.  Although many
recognize an adapter is available for PCs, this detracts from the ease and
simplicity of moving the memory card directly from one slot to another.
Moreover, many respondents express concern about investing in equipment
that uses the SD Memory Card until it becomes a proven "standard."  Past
experience has taught them that many formats and technologies are quickly
eclipsed by still more innovative options, leaving them with obsolete
equipment.  In addition, some respondents feel that budgetary constraints
would simply not allow them to make these investments, while others are
afraid to start down a road that ultimately leads to replacing equipment
that basically meets their needs and functions as expected.
"I think it's great but the problem is you need the devices that will
accept that card and I'm looking at the array, I'm thinking about how much
that technology costs, retails for, and that means I have to upgrade
everything I own today because it's already obsolete and that would be a
big problem for me.  I just couldn't afford to do that right now."  (Boston
male)
"It's really cool, but I don't think this works in the camera we have.  I
know there's that connector you can use, but basically we don't have all
the stuff, really any of the stuff you can use it in.  Maybe if we started
to buy new things in the future, and I saw this way out there and everybody
was using it, maybe then it would turn into something."  (Boston female -
IDI respondent)
"I'd have to go out and buy the adapter, and in my experience with these
things that I have to buy yet something else and something else and before
long I've worked myself up to buying a new computer or something, when
everything I had was working."  (Boston female)
"One thing I know is, it takes longer for my pictures when I use the
adapter to send files from the memory card to my computer [than in the
demonstration].  For me, anyway, it's just an annoyance, but I just,
sometimes I have to think, is it an annoyance worth spending so much money
to get something that will maybe save me five seconds?"  (Boston male)
"This is like when we went from vinyl LP albums for music to CDs, for
example.  That was a jump.  So are they jumping us now from CDs and CD
movies, are you going to be jumping to this little card?  So then all of
the equipment we have, I mean we invested the money, are you out of that
and going to get these things?  So then we have to rotate our stuff and be
keen to the technology also?"  (San Diego male)
"I don't have anything that would fit it, so I'd have to have a reader or
else buy new equipment such as this.  I don't know if I'd be willing to do
that unless I was pretty sure this was going to be it.  A lot of things
come and go pretty quick in technology."  (San Diego male)

2.    Many respondents in the focus groups and IDIs also express concern
about the small size of the SD Memory Card, which is perceived to be both
an advantage and a disadvantage.

As noted earlier, many respondents feel the small size of the memory card
makes it easy to transport or store a large volume of data.  However, the
small size of the memory card is perceived as a drawback in the following
areas:  labeling contents, avoiding misplacement of the card, and keeping
young children or animals from swallowing it.  Many respondents question
how easy it is to label the contents of the memory card (at least without a
large holder).  They prefer not to have to read a card each time they are
searching for specific types of digital data.  Since the SD Memory Card is
even smaller than the one most respondents are using now, there is
considerable concern that the card could easily be misplaced, risking the
loss of the data stored on it.  Finally, a few respondents (primarily those
living in family households), express concern that both children and
animals can easily swallow the memory card, resulting in both a health
hazard and loss of the digital information.
"The only thing is, it's so tiny.  I could lose this maybe."  (Boston male
- IDI respondent)
"I'd be worried about losing this little beast, not using it as permanent
storage."  (Boston female - Early Adopter)
"I'm a little uneasy with something that small.  OK, I would like something
small, but I've seen these little ones that are I don't even know what they
are, I'd have to go and look at them, but they look like a little key
holder.  Maybe that and a radio thing like if you beep it, it calls where
it is, then that would be very nice."  (Boston female)
"I guess one thing I'm thinking about is you've got this, how do you keep
track of what's on this?  How would I know what's on this memory?  How
could I read it, or what would I use to catalogue the information that's on
there?  I couldn't write on it."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"You're kid might eat it, or maybe your dog.  I'm not just kidding, it
could happen.  I have a 20 month old and they put everything in their
mouth."  (San Diego male)
"I'd be afraid I'd end up losing it, though, and I'd have to go out and buy
more and more of those because I couldn't keep track of them.  Then, I'd be
losing what's on them, too."  (San Diego female)

3.    A few participants express concerns about the SD Memory Card in
relation to the following issues:  how well the card works with older
equipment and how easy it is to maintain.

A few respondents recognize they may be able to use an adapter with the SD
Memory Card because their computers have USB ports.  Nonetheless their
machines are a few years old and there is concern the memory card would not
work as quickly as shown in the demonstration.  In addition, a few
respondents question whether the SD Memory Card is as easy to maintain, as
it appears to be.  There is concern that frequent handling, especially if
the card cannot be adequately labeled, could lead to damage and loss of
information.
"I wonder how fast it would be on an older computer or an older DVD or what
have you?  The memory card itself might be super fast, but then when you
try to use it with the other things, the processor, it might have trouble
keeping up with it."  (Boston male)
"An older computer might not be able to download to it as quickly as what
we saw."  (Boston female)
"Because some of it is new, it might not be compatible to a lot of software
I have.  So it might be more of a pain trying to use that than what I
already do."  (Boston female)
"Is this thing as fast on equipment that isn't so new?  Sure, this works
great with all this state-of-the-art, new equipment, but what would it be
like if it was a few years old and maybe not as fast.  It might not be any
better than what you/re doing now."  (San Diego female)
"Can you label it?  If you have to read it all the time, if you have to
touch it all the time to read it, whether touching it all the time will
damage it.  Just all the routine wear and tear."  (San Diego male)
"It's not going to get scratched like a CD, but how does it hold up if you
use it for a long time or if you keep stuff on it for a long time.  It
looks so small, and at our house, with four boys, it'll take some wear."
(Boston female - IDI respondent)

C.  Expected Impact on Usage of Digital Technology


1.    Some respondents, particularly in Boston, can identify specific
changes they would make in their use of the technology they currently own
if they were to use the SD Memory Card.

The most frequently reported change in technology use (among both Boston
and San Diego respondents) is taking more pictures with a digital camera.
Several respondents indicate they would do this because the SD Memory Card
has more capacity than what they have now.  Also related to the use of the
digital camera, isolated respondents would use the SD Memory Card as a
place to create family photo albums or to use their camera's capacity to
film video footage.  Isolated respondents note it would be easier to print
photos with the SD Memory Card because the card can be placed directly into
their printers.  However, the ease of printing might or might not lead to
their printing more photos.  A few respondents indicate they would download
more music and isolated respondents would transfer photos to their Palm
Pilot, so they could view them during the day.
"I'm an amateur photographer, so I love taking photos, but a lot of the
time I end up resorting to just the old tried and true.  But if I could
take more photos with that and get that kind of resolution, I would
definitely do that."  (Boston male)
"I like that you can put music on these.  I'd try to download more music
and put it on that because it's so easy to carry around."  (Boston male -
IDI respondent)
"I use my digital camera mainly to take pictures, but it can take film,
basically depending on how big my memory card is.  I just haven't found a
way to take footage.  But if I had a memory card that was about a gigabyte
or so, then I would definitely use it to make film."  (Boston male)
"I'm thinking I would probably use that memory card and transfer it into my
Palm Pilot, just to look at my pictures.  I use it everyday, so I shouldn't
really say that.  I would just use it in a different way -- to look at my
pictures."  (San Diego female)
"What I would use it for is to record music on.  I would use it to record
music from the computer down on a file.  If it's that universal, that's
basically what I've been waiting for anyway."  (San Diego male)
"It's simpler for me to do what he showed us, using the memory card.  If I
had this equipment and all it takes is that memory card, I'd be using it
all the time because it's simpler for me.  I've been looking at that
printer, that's like amazing, talk about compact! I go out to look at
things and then tell myself to save up the money for them."  (San Diego
female)

2.    Many respondents, however, indicate that they would not expect their
usage of current technology to change if they used the SD Memory Card.

Respondents who feel this way generally cite one of three reasons:  they
feel the technology they currently own offers similar benefits, they are
satisfied and comfortable with what they are doing now, or their current
equipment is incompatible with the SD Memory Card so they are unable to
change their usage patterns by acquiring it.  A few respondents feel they
already have the speed and functionality they see demonstrated with the SD
Memory Card on their current equipment, which they are using as much as
they want or need to.  Another segment of those who expect no changes are
respondents satisfied with how they are doing things now, who simply do not
see any reason to make changes at present.  In contrast, most respondents
who do not feel their use of technology would change note that they do not
believe any of their current technology is compatible with the SD Memory
Card.  Further, many of these respondents express reluctance to begin
investing in equipment that can accommodate the SD Memory Card until they
have some assurance the technology will become a standard and remain so for
the foreseeable future.
"This appears to be about the same as what I have.  The products I have are
all matched, so they're very compatible.  If I added a product, it would be
different, but right now I don't need it.  Everything transfers extremely
quickly and I'm happy with that."  (Boston female)
"I have all Sony products and they all work together with the Memory Stick,
so I don't think I would change anything."  (Boston male)
"I see no real difference because you're going to have basically the same
process.  You're going to transfer something to something else and it's
going to take a certain amount of time to do that, whether it's off a card
or whatever.  So at this point the only difference is that you're plugging
a wire into the end of two things, instead of taking a card and plugging it
into something else.  To me, that's not a reason to do things differently."
 (San Diego male)
"You get accustomed to using certain things and certain tools, like the
Compact Flash, that for years I downloaded straight from my camera to my
computer.  Then I got to the point where my Windows wouldn't accept it, and
so then I finally broke down and went out and bought the memory card
reader.  So until I'm forced to move on, I'm going to stick with what I'm
used to and what I know."  (San Diego female)
"I don't think I'd change the way I use my technology, because then I think
I would have to spend too much money to upgrade."  (Boston female)
"I always think about what we really have to do to keep everybody doing
what they need to do, in the house I mean.  I try not to spend money that's
going to get us stuff that doesn't last.  We'd like to change how we do
some things, to make it easier, but will it really be worth it to make the
investment?"  (San Diego male - IDI respondent)
"We still need to learn the potential that this has.  This is the first
time I see this and I believe that at some stages it's going to see that
this can replace the VHS cassette.  If it's going to be reliable and
durable, then yes, definitely this is better than a whole library of VHS
cassettes.  As long as it's going to be high quality and keep up through
the years, then yes, I would change the way I do things in the future.
It's still in the early stages, so we need to see."  (San Diego male)

D.  Purchase Intent and Pricing


1.    Quite a few participants in these focus groups would take a "wait and
see" attitude before deciding to purchase the SD Memory Card.

Respondents express considerable concern that the SD Memory Card will not
become a "standard," but will quickly be replaced by something newer.
Although this is a theme that emerges in all discussions to some degree,
the concern seems slightly stronger in Boston.  Since most respondents do
not currently own equipment which uses the SD Memory Card, they view a
commitment to the memory card as a commitment to purchasing new, compatible
equipment -- not just the card itself.  Isolated respondents also feel that
the SD Memory Card is unlikely to quickly replace current storage media
(like the DVD and CD) due to lower capacity and higher cost.  This leads
them to adopt a "wait and see" attitude as well.
"I would consider doing it [purchasing SD Memory Card].  I've been looking
into digital cameras.  But my biggest concern would be, my biggest concern
with anything I buy is, is it going to be OK two years from now?"  (Boston
male)
"Technology moves so fast that within two or three months after you
purchase something, it's almost obsolete.  So you really don't know what's
the best time to purchase something of this magnitude.  You're going to
purchase it today, and three months down the line, forget it.  Something
new is coming along.  That's my biggest concern."  (Boston male)
"I avoid buying the first generation of a product because I want to see if
it's going to become established.  Because I'm not going to invest money
and time in something that's going to become outmoded."  (Boston female)
"I wouldn't be the first one to jump on this.  I'd want to see if it stayed
around.  I'm not saying I wouldn't buy it, but I'd wait a while to see what
happened."  (San Diego female)
"I wouldn't be it right now.  I think it'll take time just because it looks
like right now it's comparable more to a VHS tape in its abilities to store
memory, but not up to a CD or a DVD yet.  Normal CDs are like 800
megabytes, and in the fall they'll have one that's a little bit better than
that.  So if it isn't going to be able to replace the DVD for me and it's
going to cost a lot more than a normal CD will, then it's going to take
some time before I'll buy.  It's going to have to become a lot more
widespread before I can afford it."  (San Diego male)

2.    The greatest barrier to purchase intent, however, is that most
respondents do not currently own equipment that can use the SD Memory Card.

Many respondents' initial reaction to questions about purchase intent for
the SD Memory Card is that they have no reason to purchase it until they
have technology that can use it.  Until they begin to upgrade their current
technology, they feel the issue is moot.  As noted earlier, respondents are
divided in their attitudes about upgrading equipment.  Some plan no new
investments in the immediate future, either due to income constraints or
satisfaction with their current equipment.  Others, however, are open to
spending money on technology in the near future and indicate that their
awareness of the SD Memory Card may play a role in their choices.  Finally,
some are unconvinced that the SD Memory Card offers enough additional
functionality to motivate change.
"First, you have to buy the equipment.  Then, you can buy the memory card."
 (Boston male)
"Right now I don't think we have anything but the Palm that can use it.  I
don't use my Palm very much, although my husband uses his.  But, none of
the things we use the most, like the camera and camcorder, would use this.
So right now, I think it's really interesting, but I don't see buying it
right away, until I would now what I could use it for."  (Boston female -
IDI respondent)
"It wouldn't be a big issue for me because nothing I have I would need it.
It would only matter if I updated."  (Boston female - Early Adopter)
"I don't have anything to put it in right now, so of course, I'm not going
to run right out and buy it, but I really like that little Panasonic.  I'd
love to get one of those that play the movies and the music and all.  If I
had that, I'd really think about buying the card."  (San Diego female)
"Well, the USB adapter only goes into the computer. What if you want to use
it on a DVD player, or whatever.  If you want to use it, you're going to
have to buy something else to plug into all of those.  That's more wires,
more parts, and more pieces.  You should see my desk.  And maybe they won't
even have those, so you're back to square one.  I think I'll jut stay with
what I have, since it works."  (San Diego male)
"I don't know.  I just think for the things I do with my computer back and
forth, like it's pretty easy to just plug in the USB port to the front of
the computer and the pictures go there anyways and I think that you want to
be able to edit those pictures before printing anyways, so I don't know --
it doesn't seem to make that much of a difference."  (Boston male)

3.    San Diego respondents and teens participating in the IDIs are more
likely than others to say they are interested in purchasing the SD Memory
Card.

San Diego respondents are generally more positive in their expressions of
purchase intent than their Boston counterparts.  However, even some of
these respondents admit their interest hinges on having equipment that is
compatible with the SD Memory Card or the availability of adapters to make
it useable with their current equipment.  Teens participating in the IDIs
are very likely to say they want the SD Memory Card, although their parents
would most likely be the purchasers.  Teens have the least aversion to the
idea of purchasing upgraded or additional equipment, possibly because they
have not experienced the practical impacts of purchasing equipment that is
quickly outmoded.  However, several parents participating in the IDIs raise
concerns about the potential cost of the memory card and current lack of
equipment on which to use it.
"Considering I had all the equipment. I would love to have it [SD Memory
Card}.  (San Diego male)
"I would very much like to have it."  (San Diego male)
"I would buy it, because for me, if it gives me added functionality for my
camera, which is what I'm primarily interested in, then I would buy it.
You'd have less of that dead time between shots on your camera, and that
would be worth it."  (Boston female)
"I would definitely want to get this.  It lets you do so much and gives you
so much more space on the memory card.  I'd really want to get this."
(Boston female - IDI respondent)
"Well, I'd still want to be sure it was going to last for awhile.  I agree
with her [above respondent], that it does some great stuff, but I'm more
cautious about this because I've seen all kinds of thing come and go."
(Boston female - IDI respondent, commenting on her daughter's remarks
(above))
"Well I think they're going to be giving you a speed adapter for any
equipment that uses this.  You know, then you can just plug it into the
adapter and you're set.  I would be interested in buying this.  It really
simplifies things."  (San Diego male)

4.    Most respondents have great difficulty articulating how much they
would be willing to pay for the SD Memory Card on an unaided basis.

Research participants generally have little knowledge about the prices of
memory cards.  A few respondents, who have purchased memory cards
themselves, can sometimes recall the prices they paid and use these as a
benchmark.  Many offer the caveat that prices will certainly have declined
since they made their purchases.  The key expectations regarding SD Memory
Card prices are that they will initially be high and then decline as use of
the card becomes more prevalent.  Many feel this is the typical pattern
with newly-introduced technologies.
"I bought a 32 meg memory card, and it was, I think it was like $49, about
two or three years ago.  So I bet it's {SD Memory Card] more than $25 for
128 megs, but then again, prices should have come down."  (Boston male)
"I really can't tell you what one of these would cost.  I bet it's a lot
though, because it's new.  Usually the prices come down after something's
been around for awhile, but this is new and so I think it could be
expensive."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I think I paid about sixty bucks for a 64 meg card, a couple of months
ago.  But I can't really remember."  (Boston male)
"I'd probably spend something similar to what I paid for the memory sticks
that I already have.  Like $100 for the 128 meg.  But, they've probably
come down, like everything else does."  (San Diego male)
"I don't remember exactly what I paid for the memory card we have in our
camera now, but it was probably around $80 or so.  This'll probably start
out at least that high, but then it'll come down."  (San Diego male - IDI
respondent)

5.    Some respondents consider the pricing issue in terms of the cost of
alternative media now being used for the same purpose.

In the absence of memory card purchasing experience, some respondents
(particularly in San Diego) think about what they would be willing to pay
for the memory card in the context of what it would replace.  In this
situation, they are usually thinking of the SD Memory Card as a storage
device, taking little account of its capability to transfer material
between different types of technology.  Most conclude they are unwilling to
pay more than the cost of a DVD (or sometimes, a CD) for the SD Memory
Card, since that is their most likely alternative.  A few respondents,
however, indicate they would simply shop for the best possible deal at the
time they were in the market for the memory card, limiting their spending
primarily based on budget constraints.
"I'm thinking that if this is going to replace everything like a VHS tape,
then I would like to pay the same amount I'm paying for like a movie.  If I
was to pay for a DVD movie it would be $19 to $20, maybe $25 or $30, so I
would want to pay the same price for the memory card, because I'm not going
to switch over to a $59 movie."  (San Diego female)
"I'm only going to be storing one movie on one of these, and if each movie
is going to cost me something like $200, then it's not going to work."
(San Diego male)
"Just to be relativist, a CD holds 600 megabytes and costs 50 cents.  I'd
think twice about spending a lot of money on one of these because there are
cheaper alternatives."  (Boston male - Early Adopter)
"Well, whatever it sells for, if it's $100, I'm sure I could get it for $60
or $70 on the Internet somewhere."  (San Diego female)
"Being a poor college student, I'm going to ask my mother to buy it and
wait for the super, super sale on it.  Otherwise, I can't afford it."
(Boston female)

6.    A review of the show card describing the capacities of various SD
memory cards in terms of how many photos it can hold, as well as audio and
video output helps respondents focus their thinking about pricing.  Most
would select a larger capacity card, but would be willing to pay relatively
little for it.

Providing respondents with operational descriptions of the various capacity
memory cards helps them clarify their thinking about both what they need
and what they are willing to pay for it.  Most respondents (particularly
those with any interest in transferring music or video) claim they would be
interested in 512MB cards or higher, while those who interests are limited
to casual photography typically choose the 256MB card.  There is little
interest in the 64MB card, because respondents with even minimal digital
photography experience feel more comfortable with a larger capacity to meet
their needs while traveling or photographing important family events.
Respondents spontaneously indicate they are willing to pay considerably
less for each size memory card than the cards are expected to cost.  They
also expect prices to increase at a decreasing rate as memory card capacity
increases.
"Personally, I'd go with the 512, more so.  I like the increased capacity,
especially for the audio and the video.  I was thinking more between 75 and
100 dollars."  (Boston male)
"I only take pictures and I think something between that 64 and 256 would
be enough for me.  I'm just getting started.  [128 MB] What he said would
be enough.  Maybe I'd pay $30 for it."  (Boston female)
"I'd be interested in the 512 because that's going to give me some decent
memory, but I don't know what you'd pay for it.  Well over $100 would be my
guess, maybe $150?"  (Boston male)
"For one gig[abyte], I'd pay 40 bucks at the most."  (San Diego male)
"I'd buy one of the smaller ones for my computer for 20 or 30 bucks for the
information I could move, but not for no music."  (San Diego female)
"If I got the one gigabyte, which is more like what I need, I'd pay $19.95.
 [LAUGHTER]  I'm serious.  That's what I'd pay."  (San Diego male)
"I don't think the prices should go up in even increments.  Price isn't
going to double, just because the memory doubled."  (Boston female)
"When you go up to higher megabytes, they're going to want to make it more
attractive for you to do that, whereas if you bought a lower megabyte card,
you would pay more per megabyte.  It'll be like, when you buy business
cards, if you buy 5,000 business cards they're not that much more than
buying 250 business cards."  (Boston male)

7.    Most respondents initially indicate they would want to purchase one
larger SD Memory Card instead of several smaller ones.  However, interest
in multiple small cards rises when potential uses are suggested on an aided
basis.

When asked if they would prefer one larger SD Memory Card or several
smaller ones, the vast majority of respondents select the larger capacity
card.  They reason that a larger card can hold more material, making it
less likely they will run out of space for an application at an inopportune
time.  A common example is respondents who fear running out of room for
photos on a vacation trip or at an important family event.  When
respondents are given suggestions for how multiple cards might serve their
needs (e.g., everyone in the household can have his/her own memory card or
each device can have its own memory card), some reconsider the issue and
indicate several smaller cards might be more useful.  In addition, some
decide that a larger card plus several smaller ones would be ideal for
their needs.
"I'd rather buy one big one, because going back to the fact that you can
run out of space at a critical time, I think one works better."  (Boston
male)
"One very large capacity card.  Because, and I'm only thinking the only
time you use technology is when you're in an entertainment mode, so I'm on
vacation or sightseeing or at a family event, so you don't want t carry a
bunch of devices and run out of space for these events.  So the larger the
card, the better."  (Boston male)
"Now that you mention it, maybe we could use separate smaller ones.  Since
I'm divorced and the children are with their mother sometimes, it could
make it easier if we had more than one and then if I needed to use it when
they were with their mother, I could have one and they could have one."
(Boston male - IDI respondent)
"I would say just one big one, because you never know if you want to take
pictures and do some recording you know, use it in different ways, if
you're going to be away from home for a long period of time on vacation,
I'd want to carry around just one."  (San Diego male)
"Actually, that's a very good point, like my husband could go up and do his
thing, and I could go up with my kid and put it on ours, I'd say separate
cards for that."  (San Diego female)
"I'd want some of both.  I mean because you'd leave the big one at home and
you'd bring the little ones with you.  Like not necessarily all of them,
but a couple, in case you need the room."  (San Diego male)

E.  Impact of SD Memory Card Capability on Digital Product Purchase
Decisions


1.    Most respondents claim SD Memory Card capability is not likely to be
a key factor in digital product purchase decisions.

The vast majority of participants in this research feel they would choose
new digital products based primarily on the basis of their expectations for
the product and its performance.  While SD Memory Card capability is an
asset, it is not an important enough factor to out weigh considerations
related to the product's intrinsic characteristics.  Many respondents,
however, do agree that if two products are very similar in all respects,
except for having SD Memory Card capability, then the product with that
capability will most likely be chosen.  A few respondents also express
concern about whether the SD Memory Card will become an industry standard,
indicating they would not consider it a purchase factor unless they had
this assurance.  Also, it is noteworthy that a few respondents,
particularly in San Diego, indicate they would seek SD Memory Card
capability in future technology purchases because they feel it will become
the standard.
"I would definitely be looking for the quality that I wanted, rather then
if I could shove the card in and save myself a wire."  (Boston female -
Early Adopter)
"If I was looking for a camera right now I would be going on the quality of
the pictures I could get with the camera, the memory card would be the last
thing on my mind.  They really would."  (San Diego female)
"I would want to look at other things first.  If we were getting a new
camera or camcorder, I'd look at what we wanted from the product before I'd
think about the memory card.  It's too big a purchase for us to be
disappointed in a big way."  (San Diego male - IDI respondent)
"No, because I never heard of the SD Memory Card until tonight and I would
really want to know, well, who else has something like this, who's nipping
the heels of the SD Memory Card makers, that going to offer a better value
or is going to be available in more different sizes or whatever.  You know
it all goes back to how Sony had the Beta format and then there was the VHS
format.  Which one is it gonna be?"  (Boston male)
"It's [SD Memory Card capability] a good tie breaker.  I think I would lean
toward something that had that kind of flexibility, if it didn't mean
sacrificing anything else."  (Boston female)
"Yeah, probably I would consider it.  Because it seems like this is the way
things are going.  I was shopping around for a new computer not that long
ago and floppy drives are now an optional accessory.  It's sort of the
direction things are going in, there's a small little memory sticks or
cards and there's a thousand different version of pretty much the same
thing, but that's sort of the wave of the future."  (San Diego male)

2.    Most respondents agree that if they already had one product with SD
Memory Card capability, they would make it a priority to have this
capability in technology devices they purchased subsequently.

Most respondents feel that the purchase of additional digital products with
SD Memory Card capability would increase the functionality of their overall
technology investment.  With every additional unit that can use a SD Memory
Card, users have more flexibility and can take better advantage of the
card's capabilities.  However, some respondents point out that the purchase
of the initial SD-capable product will depend on its overall quality,
ability to meet their needs, as well as their confidence that the SD Memory
Card is on its way to becoming a standard.
"It does make sense to me if your other products work with it, because now
you can take it out of there and put it in your DVD player or your Palm or
whatever."  (San Diego male)
"Assuming that I was happy with it in the first place, that it's as great
as it looks and I already have one, yes, I think that would be a factor.
You like to have things that match and work together."  (San Diego female)
"The more use we can make of it, the better.  If we had one thing that
worked with this, then it would be a bigger factor in the purchase of other
things."  (Boston female - IDI respondent)
"I jut had a thought, because it seems to me that what's important is, is
the SD Memory Card going to become some sort of de facto standard or not.
If it is, then it won't be hard to convince me to buy the first one, and
after that all my new stuff will work with it.  But to me, that's the big
question."  (Boston male)
"Absolutely, I would want to be sure that if I already could use the card.
that other things I bought worked with it, too.  That's only common sense
because then you'll get the most out of your equipment.  You can move
something from one to another."  (Boston male)

3.    The vast majority of respondents expect products with SD Memory Card
capability to be just as easy to use as comparable products without it.

Most focus group and IDI participants expect SD Memory Card capability to
have no impact on the ease or difficulty of operating a digital product.
The presence of the memory card should be "transparent," as several
respondents described their expectations.  Isolated respondents indicate it
would be acceptable for a product to be slightly more complex to use due to
the memory card capability.
"No, I don't see why it would make any difference at all."  (Boston female)
"I would hope it would be completely transparent and that there would be no
impact.  That'll be my expectation."  (Boston male)
"I don't know why there would be any difference.  If there is, then that
would throw the whole ball of wax up in the air again.  The camera or
whatever should be just the same as it would be without it."  (San Diego
male)
"It should be really easy.  Otherwise, why bother?"  (San Diego male)
"If it takes like a bit of learning, and in return will give you more
functionality and work more efficiently, I can learn a few new buttons."
(San Diego male)
"I would not expect it to be any different with or without a memory card.
If it was more complicated, then it wouldn't be fun."  (San Diego female)

4.    Many respondents agree they would be willing to pay a premium for SD
Memory Card capability in new digital equipment they purchased.  However, a
sizeable segment of respondents would be unwilling to do so.

Respondents who indicate they are willing to pay a premium for products
with SD Memory Card capability often have difficulty deciding or
articulating how much of a premium they would be willing to pay.  Many
indicate 10% - 15% seems reasonable to them.  Others go higher, into the
30% range.  Still others are more comfortable choosing a dollar-figure,
which can go as high as $50.00 - $100.00, but can be as low as $5.00.
Overall, there is considerable uncertainty about how much of a premium SD
Memory Card capability can command.  In general, respondents happy with
what they have now are less willing to pay a premium than those who are
dissatisfied.
Other respondents, however, indicate they would not be willing to pay any
premium for this capability because if the SD Memory Card is going to
become the industry standard, then all digital equipment will ultimately
incorporate it.  Past experience leads them to conclude that new features
ultimately become part of the overall product price as they become
"standard."
"If I really thought the SD capability was what I needed I'd go up 10 to 15
percent."  (Boston female - Early Adopter)
"Not a great deal more because that's really not so unique.  $25, tops."
(Boston male)
"Like I would see it as a tie breaker, but I would see it as a way for a
company to get me to buy their product, which is already winning in a
sense.  Yeah, I wouldn't want to pay that much extra.  I would see it as
more of an option, like it'll be flexible and if I decided to use it, it'll
be good to have that.  I don't know exactly how much, but it wouldn't be a
lot."  (Boston male)
"Well, considering usually when I buy stuff it's under $100, I would say
like $5 or something like that, so like five to ten percent maybe.  But
you've got to understand that when you're already buying a really expensive
product, you don't want to pay an extra 10 percent just for something
that's going to plug into your neighbor, or something so you can share
something.  You want something that's going to be useful to you and
economical as well."  (Sand Diego male)
"Like I'd say 50 to 100 [dollars] just because, maybe it's different for me
because a lot of the equipment that we have is getting redundant, and so
we're looking right now, so maybe I'm sitting thinking with that in the
back of my mind.  OK, I can do this, if I can do this than I can do this.
I'm not in the area where I'm happy with everything I've got right now."
(San Diego female)
"I wouldn't pay extra because I know if you wait, it's going to be
universal anyway.  It's like I'm not that type of person anymore, where I
need the first toy on the block.  Because the products I have right now
accommodate what I need, but obviously, it'd be nice to get rid of some
things I don't really have room for, but I can wait for that because I know
eventually that will happen."  (San Diego male)

IV.  Retail Environment


A.  Purchasing Sources


1.    Respondents across the focus groups and IDIs would expect to be able
to purchase SD Memory Cards in a wide range of retail and on-line outlets.

Respondents expect SD Memory Cards to be available in consumer electronics
stores (like Best Buy and Circuit City), computer superstores (like CompUSA
and Computer city), office superstores (like Office Max and Staples), as
well as mass merchants (like Target and Wal-Mart).  On-line outlets for
computer equipment would also be expected to carry SD Memory Cards.
Overall, there is a strong expectation that the memory cards will be sold
through any sources that currently carry digital equipment and accessories.

2.    Some respondents also feel the distribution of SD Memory Cards will
ultimately go beyond the expected sources and include a still wider array
of retail organizations.

Some respondents in these focus groups can imagine a wider variety of
retailers ultimately selling the SD Memory Card, including toy stores,
grocery stores, warehouse clubs, drug stores, camera stores, and
audio/video outlets like Fye and Strawberries.  If the memory card becomes
an industry standard for the transfer and storage of digital data, the
number and variety of outlets is expected to multiply quickly.
"Well given the way our technological industry works, within a year or two
of its coming out, I'd expect to find it in Walgreen's and CVS."  (Boston
female)
"Anywhere there's electronics, I'd eventually expect these to show up.
Especially, in like camera stores, where you should find anything you need
to use with a camera."  (Boston male)
"They'll be at Costco and places like that, where you can buy them in
bulk."  (San Diego male)
"I think we'll see them in toy stores, where they carry video games. And
who knows what else will come out when this gets more popular."  (San Diego
female - IDI respondent)
"Wouldn't you expect to find this anywhere they sell any sort of product
that uses it?  So if they sell MP3 players, or this little gadget
[Panasonic} at any store, it should be there."  (San Diego male)
"I bet they'll be in the grocery stores -- at least the low capacity ones.
After all, they do sell film."  (San Diego female)

B.  In-Store Positioning of SD Memory Cards


1.    Most respondents expect SD Memory Cards to be found in multiple
locations throughout a consumer electronics store, including with other
storage devices, in a separate section of the store.

Most respondents expect the SD Memory Card to be found in several locations
throughout stores like Best Buy and Circuit City.  One place they clearly
expect to find it is in the section that includes CDs, floppy discs, other
memory cards, and other accessories, like cables.  This is considered
important by many because it is where they would look for them if coming
into the store just to purchase the memory card.  Isolated respondents note
it might only be available behind the sales counter because the memory
card's small size makes it a target for theft.  One San Diego focus group
expressed strong opposition to placing memory cards "all over the store,"
and a strong preference to find them in one place, so that shoppers are
certain the store's stock is all displayed in that location.
"Like near where you get your storage media, I would think.  I would go to
where the CDs are." (Boston male)
"I think it should be by the accessories, like by the cables, because it is
somewhat of a connecting device.  I don't want to have to go look for it.
It should be there."  (Boston female)
"I would think this should be with the other storage, like CDs and all.  I
would almost think it would be behind the counter because it's so small;
you can slip it right in your pocket.  I mean, not that I would steal it,
but that could happen."  (San Diego female)
"Oh, I'd think it would be in a lot of places in the store, but I'd
definitely want them to be in area where the CDs, floppies, and other
memory cards are, because if that's what you come in for, that's what you
expect to find."  (San Diego male - IDI respondent)
"That's a good question because when I go shopping they're all over the
place.  They're with the cameras, they're with storage, they're here,
they're there.  You're just like, my, my, what's happening?  They should be
in one location.  They should all be grouped together."  San Diego female)
"I agree [with above comment] because usually when you go into a store, you
expect to go to one place to find something.  Then you know that if they
have it, this is where it should be."  (San Diego male)

2.    Most respondents, however, would also expect the SD Memory Card to be
displayed with any digital equipment that uses it.

Consumer electronics stores should also display the memory card with
digital cameras, MP3 players, computers that have slots to accommodate it,
printers, DVD players, camcorders, Palm Pilots and any other digital
technology in which it can be used.  This facilitates shopping for the
equipment because consumers can quickly see what accessories are available
to them and make decisions without having to go to various parts of the
store.
:"It should be almost like a product placement in a movie.  If I'm buying
this great DVD player that has a memory card, I'd almost want to see some
hanging there, so I could just pick them up."  (Boston female)
"With all this stuff.  With the little TV and the DVD player.  Even with a
MP3, really with everything that uses it."  (Boston female - IDI
respondent)
"I'd expect them to be with the cameras, printers, Palm Pilots -- whatever
uses it.  So you can see what you need to get when you're buying certain
equipment."  (San Diego male - IDI respondent)
"I think it would be near all the products that it's compatible with.  You
know, it should be on the little hook next to the cameras, and the DVD
players, and the yeah whatever.  It should be right there, so no matter
what you're buying, you know this card goes with it."  (San Diego female)

V.  Communication of Key SD Memory Card Benefits


A.  Key Benefits


1.    Respondents across the focus groups identify similar key benefits for
the SD Memory Card.  Those mentioned most often include:  size,
portability, universality, capacity, ease-of-use, and speed.

Teams set up in each of the focus groups are very consistent in identifying
what they feel are the key benefits of the SD Memory Card.  Virtually all
teams consider the memory card's size to be a benefit because it is smaller
than competing devices such as CDs and VHS tapes.  The SD Memory Card is
also considered highly portable due to its small size.  Universality is
another benefit consistently identified by teams in these groups.  The
ability to move from one technology to another, as well as among various
manufacturers' products, is considered a key distinguishing feature.  The
vast majority of teams report the memory card's availability in various
sizes (some larger than those made by other brands) is a key benefit.  Most
teams also note the card is very easy to use.  Finally, the speed with
which the card works is faster than others they are familiar with.
"For advantages, we said small size, but large capacity with several
choices, portability, speed, and that's its used by many manufacturers of
different products."  (Boston female)
"We said size, convenience, compatibility with many products, speed, it's
easy to travel with.  I think that's about it."  (Boston male)
"We though the benefits were it's compact size, portability, capacity,
simplicity to use, and its versatility.  You can use it with a lot of
different companies' products."  (San Diego male)
"We’re just going to go with our top four benefits, which are size,
capacity, universality, and being simple to use." (San Diego male)
"We wrote down for the benefits, the large capacity and the range of
capabilities, the small size which makes it compact to carry, you can use
them on many types of equipment, they're convenient, and they seem rugged
and durable."  (San Diego male)

B.  Communication Strategies


2.    Respondents make a wide range of suggestions concerning how the SD
Memory Card's benefits can be communicated; many focus on the Internet,
mass media or promotions.

Internet-based marketing of the SD Memory Card is considered "natural" by
many respondents, who feel technology products are easily marketed to users
in that environment.  Many teams suggest the SD Memory card be marketed
through advertisements in print media such as computer magazines and
general circulation newspapers.  In addition, many feel television
advertising would be effective, particularly because it would allow
potential customers to see the memory card.  Some teams also suggest radio
ads.  Promotions, such as mailing out small capacity memory cards to owners
of products that use them, offering coupons for trial of the memory card,
or otherwise discounting the SD Memory Card for first-time buyers are also
perceived to be effective in drawing the attention of potential buyers.
"They should for sure run ads on the Internet, because that's where people
go for information about products like this anyway.  That will attract the
kind of person who uses technology."  (Boston female)
"The best ways to communicate it would be through Internet ads, computer
store circulars, direct mailings, and maybe even by sponsoring events for
young people, like something related to sports."  (Boston male)
"As far as the various types of media, advertise in computer magazines, TV,
a little bit, maybe even at seminars and trade shows to reach the business
people."  (Boston male)
"The best ways to communicate this would be visual ads, for example,
newspapers, TV, and magazines.  This way people can see it."  (San Diego
female)
"Have promotions, like what AOL does when they send out their CDs.  You
could send out SD Memory Cards with small capacity and tell people how to
use them.  That way they would have a chance to try them.  Then have a
coupon for anybody who wants to go buy one, so they have the incentive to
do it."  (San Diego female)
"We think television is probably your best mode of media to get it out
there.  We couldn't come up with a specific way to do it, but funny the
infomercial type of idea, where you could actually explain every product
that could use it, would probably work best."  (San Diego male)

3.    Many teams across the focus groups also emphasize that product
demonstrations would be an important and effective way to communicate the
benefits of the SD Memory Card.

Multiple teams in each focus group recommend in-store product
demonstrations or videos, which show how the product is used and provide an
opportunity to display its benefits.  While some envision a person showing
how the memory card can be moved from product to product and explaining its
features, others suggest a continuous loop video could fulfill the same
purpose.  However, there is strong agreement that a demonstration is the
most powerful way to communicate what the SD Memory Card can do.
"We'd go into a bunch of stores with like TV/VCR units, with an endless
broadcast loop.  Set up near where the units were for sale, and show what
it can do.  We'd also give people a hands-on opportunity to try them to see
how easy it is to slide it into the camera and to print pictures, or
whatever."  (Boston male)
"I think store displays are the way to go.  Most people go and browse in a
store for technology.  And the store display might help people understand
how this works.  At Christmas time, it's good for people who are looking
for gifts."  (Boston male)
"Do a demo in the computer stores, and in other stores like Target, Costco
etc.  Make a comparison using the new equipment versus the old equipment to
show the public."  (San Diego female)
"We would set up a demonstration.  Like John came in here and he showed us
how it was used.  He gave us a little demonstration and everything like
that.  That would always be a bonus because you can always say 'look, we
have this new SD chip' on TV or on radio, but no one really knows what it
is.  They can't ask any questions about it either.  Like in a store, you
could set up a display where people come up and actually interact with it,
have their pictures taken, or whatever."  (San Diego male)

APPENDIX A:



                       DISCUSSION GUIDE AND SCREENERS



DRAFT DISCUSSION GUIDE

A.  Introduction

      1.    Tape recording, observers
      2.    Casual, relaxed, informal atmosphere
      3.    No right or wrong answers
      4.    Discussion guidelines

            a.   Talk one at a time
            b.   Don't dominate the conversation
            c.   Talk in any order
            d.   Encourage others to participate/everyone participate
                 equally
            e.   Turn-off cell phones/pagers

      5.    Personal introductions (name, town you live in, who's in your
            family, occupation, digital technology owned by your household)

B.    Warm-up:  Understanding and Usage of Memory Cards

      1.    You've all mentioned that you own certain types of digital
           technology, like digital cameras, Video cam recorders (use other
           examples from introductory comments).  Who in your household
           uses these technologies?  For what purposes are they most
           commonly used?  (GET SENSE OF WHAT RESPONDENTS ARE DOING AND
           WITH WHAT FREQUENCY.)


            •     How important is the ability to move digital data to you?
            •     For what reasons/purposes do you currently transfer
           digital
                  data?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     send pictures
            •     download music from Internet
            •     print photos
            •     move items to/from your PC


      2.    How do you store or transfer the images, music, or other
           material you have gathered?  How else do you transfer or store
           this material?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     by wiring one technology to another/networking
            •     sending it by wireless means
            •     using a memory card  (IF NOT MENTIONED, ASK)
                  What type of memory card do you use?  Why?


                  •    CF (Compact Flash) memory card
                  •    Memory Stick (Sony)
                  •    SD Memory Card
                  •    Smart Media
                  •    xD-Picture Card
                  •    MultiMediaCard (MMC)


      3.    What works well/what do you like about the way you transfer
           material from one technology to another now?  (PROBE FOR
           SPECIFICS)


      4.    What would you like to do differently in terms of transferring
           material from one technology to another?  What don't you like
           about what you're doing now?  (PROBE FOR SPECIFIC EXAMPLES/TYPES
           OF TRANSFERS)


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     too time consuming
            •     too complicated/involves too many steps
            •     too difficult to install and troubleshoot
            •     involves purchase of additional equipment
            •     cost of needed equipment is high
            •     not enough capacity on available technology


      4a.   Who in your household transfers material from one technology to
           another?  Why?


            •     What would encourage others in the household to
                  transfer materials as well?


      5.    How do you store digital material (photos, videos, music etc.)?
           How easy or difficult is it for you to keep it organized?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     capacity of devices
            •     ability to categorize/file/organize material
            •     ability to reproduce it if/when desired


      6.    How many of you know about memory cards?  How many of you use
           memory cards to store or transfer information?  What are your
           impressions of memory cards?  (CAPTURE USERS/NON-USERS
           IMPRESSIONS SEPARATELY ON EASEL.)


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     reliability
            •     capacity (vs. desired capacity)
            •     ease of use
            •     cost
            •     size


      6a.   (FOR CURRENT USERS) How are you using memory cards?


            (PROBE)


            •     Which products do you use memory cards in?
            •     What kind of data do you save on memory cards
                  (photos, music, documents, other)?
            •     How do you organize your material?  One card with all your
           data
                  on it or multiple cards with different data on them?
            •     (IF USE MULTIPLE CARDS) How do you share the  memory
                  cards among members of your family?
            •     If you had a memory card with greater capacity, would that
                  change how you use the cards?


                  •    increase in printing?




      7.    How do you get information about digital technology products?
           How else do you get this type of information?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     family/friends/co-workers
            •     computer-related publications (which ones?)
            •     the internet (which sites/types of sites>)
            •     user groups (which ones?)
            •     broadcast media (which ones?)
            •     retail stores




C.    Demonstration of SD Memory Card

      1.    Now we're going to see a demonstration of the SD memory card.
           This demonstration will take 5 - 10 minutes and allow you to see
           how the card can be used.  This demonstration will be done by
           John.


            (DEMONSTRATION)


      2.    What is your understanding of the SD memory card?  What does it
           do?  (PROBE UNTIL UNPRODUCTIVE.)


            •     Is anything confusing or hard to understand about the SD
           memory
                  card?


      3.    What advantages, if any, do you see in the SD memory card?  What
           benefits can you see in using the SD memory card?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     size
            •     capacity
            •     ease of use
            •     speed
            •     products it can be used with
            •     many products/manufacturers use SD memory cards


      4.    What disadvantages, if any, do you see in the SD memory card?
           What would make it more useful or attractive to you?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     cost
            •     capacity limitations
            •     inability to use on a PC without an adapter
            •     already use another memory card
            •     speed of operation during use


      4a.   Overall, do you feel the SD memory card is preferable to other
           methods of transferring data or not?  Why do you say that?


      5.    If you had a SD memory card, would it change how you use any of
           the digital technology you own?  (PROBE)  How would it change
           your use of digital technology?


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     printers
            •     digital cameras
            •     MP3 players
            •     PDA's
            •     Video Cam Recorders
            •     PCs



      6.    How likely would you be to consider purchasing a SD memory card?
            Why do you say that?  (PROBE FOR SPECIFIC REASONS WHY/WHY NOT
           PURCHASE.)


            •     What would you expect to pay for a SD memory card?
            •     How much capacity would you want it to have?
            •     Would you prefer a larger capacity card at a lower price,
           or
                  smaller capacity cards that each cost more, but may make
                  it possible for you to keep different kinds of
           files/materials
                  on separate cards?
            •     Would you be willing to spend $ (AIDED AMOUNT) on a
                  SD memory card that could store (EXAMPLE)
                  (OR ALTERNATIVE PRICE/CAPACITY EXAMPLE)
            •     (FOR RESPONDENTS WITH MULTIPLE USERS IN
                 HOUSEHOLD)  If there were several users of SD
                 memory cards in your household, how would you
                 use/share the memory cards?


      7.    Would knowing that a product is capable of using a SD memory
           card influence your likelihood to purchase it?  How important a
           factor would this be in your choice of products?  Would you be
           willing to pay more for a product with an SD memory card?  How
           much more?  (PROBE FOR REASONS WHY WOULD/WOULD NOT INFLUENCE
           PURCHASE)


            (PROBE LIKELIHOOD TO PURCHASE FOLLOWING PRODUCTS
            WITH SLOTS/WILLINGNESS TO PAY MORE)


            •     printers (along with photo printing paper and ink)
            •     Video Cam Recorders
            •     MP3 players
            •     PDAs
            •     PCs
            •     digital cameras
            •     laptops


      8.    If you already have one product that uses a SD memory card, how
           does that influence your decisions to purchase other products?
           Do you look for other products that have SD card slots?  Why or
           why not?


      9.    How does having a SD memory card affect your usage of that
           product?  Do you feel that the SD card slot affects how easy or
           difficult the product is to use?  Why?


            (PROBE)


            •     Do you/would you expect to print more or less if you had a
           SD
                  memory card slot in the printer?  Why?
            •     Would you expect a handheld device or laptop to be more or
           less
                  functional for you with a SD card slot?  Why?


D.    Retail  Environment

      1.    Where would you expect to be able to buy SD memory cards?  Where
           else would you expect to buy them.


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     internet
            •     catalogues
            •     consumer electronics stores (e.g., Best buy, Circuit City)
            •     computer superstores (like CompUSA)
            •     office product superstores (like Office Max or Staples)
            •     mass merchants (e.g., Target, Wal-Mart)
            •     Audio/video retailers (e.g., Fye, Strawberries etc.)


      2.    If you were shopping for SD memory cards in a consumer
           electronics store, like Best Buy or Circuit City, where in the
           store would you expect to find them?  (PROBE FOR SPECIFIC
           LOCATION(S))


            (PROBE, IF NOT MENTIONED)


            •     with digital cameras
            •     with printers
            •     with PCs
            •     with PDAs
            •     with Video Cam Recorders
            •     with video tapes, blank CDs, blank DVDs etc.


E.    Board of Directors Exercise

      1.    I'm going to divide you into teams to do an exercise with me.
           I'd like you to pretend that you are all on the Board of
           Directors of the company that makes SD memory cards and that
           you're preparing for a meeting where you'll be asked to present
           your ideas in response to the following questions:


            What are the most important benefits of SD memory cards to
           digital technology users?  What is the best way to le users know
           about those benefits?


            (DISTRIBUTE NOTE PADS/PENS.  ASK EACH TEAM TO COME UP WITH A
           JOINT RESPONSE THAT WILL BE PRESENTED TO THE ENTIRE GROUP.)


      2.    (SEE OBSERVERS FOR ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS.  POSE QUESTIONS TO
           RESPONDENTS.)


      3.    Before we end this discussion, I'd like each group to present
           the top benefits of SD memory cards and how they should be
           communicated to digital technology users.


      4.    Thank respondents.

Location:              Date/Time:
Downtown    ………………………………..1  Mon., June 9 _________________
Framingham  ……………………………2     Tues., June 10 ________________


BOSTON MEMORY CARD SCREENER - IDI's


NAMES:      ______________________________________________________

ADDRESS:    ______________________________________________________

            ______________________________________________________

PHONE/DAY:  ____________________        EVE: ______________________

Hello, my name is ___________ and I'm calling from Performance Plus, an
independent market research company located in the Boston area.  Today
we're conducting some research regarding digital technology and we'd like
to include your opinions.

1.    First of all, please tell me into which of the following categories
your age falls.

                 Under 18 (ASK FOR A HOUSEHOLD
                 MEMBER 18 OR OVER. BEGIN AGAIN.)
                 18 - 24     …………………………………………..1
                 25 - 39     …………………………………………..2
                 40 - 55     …………………………………………..3
                 56 - 70     …………………………………………4
                 71 or over (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                       0 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

2.    Are you, or is anyone in your household, currently employed in any of
      the following occupations?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

            Advertising, market research, or public relations ……………...1
            Marketing or marketing communications for a company that
                 manufactures, distributes, or sells any type of high tech-
                 nology or consumer electronics products ………….……….2
                            Sales (either retail or wholesale) for a
                 company that manufac-tures or resells any type of high
                 technology or consumer electronics products
                 …………….……………………..…..…3

(IF "YES" TO ANY, TALLY & TERMINATE)         0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9


3.    Have you ever participated in a market research group discussion
      lasting more than half an hour?

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   …………………………….1
                       No (GO TO Q. 5)  ……………………………2

4.    About how long ago was that?

                       _____________________________________
                       (RECORD EXACT RESPONSE.  IF LESS
                       THAN SIX MONTHS AGO, TALLY & TER-
                       MINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

5.    Which of the following statements best describes your personal living
      situation at this time?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSES.)

                             I am currently living alone …..………………1
                             I am currently living with my spouse…...……2
                                  I am currently living with children who
                                        are 10 years of age or younger
                                     ….……..3
                             I am currently living with children
                                  who are 11 to 17 years of age……………4
                             I am currently living with roommates
                                  or other unrelated adults   ………………..5

(IF CODE 4 NOT CIRCLED,
TALLY & TERMINATE)            0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

6.    Please tell me which of the following items have been purchased by
      your household, for personal use.  (READ LIST.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  …………..7
                 (DO NOT READ)    None (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

7.    Are you, yourself, the principal user of any of the digital
      technology items your household owns?  By that I mean, do you use any
      of the items we just discussed more often than any other member of
      your household.

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   ……………………………..1
                       No (ASK FOR ANOTHER PARENT WHO IS
                             THE PRIMARY USER OF AT LEAST ONE
                             ITEM MENTIONED IN Q. 6.  IF NO ONE
                             AVAILABLE DURING STUDY PERIOD,
                             TALLY & TERMINATE.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

8.    Which  of these item(s) are you the principal user of? (CIRCLE
      APPROPRIATE
      ITEM(S) BELOW.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  ………….7

9.    Which of the following items have you ever heard of?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                       USB Ports  ………………………………………1
                       Memory Cards     ………………………………….2
                       CD Rom     ………………………………………..3
                       Floppy disk drives    ……………………………..4

      (IF CODE 2  -- MEMORY CARDS --
      NOT  CIRCLED, TALLY & TERMINATE)  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

10.   You mentioned that you have a child/children, aged 11 to 17 living in
      your household.  Is that child/are any of those children also regular
      users of any of the digital equipment your household owns?

                       Yes (CONTINUE)
                       No (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9



11.   Which digital equipment does your child/do your children use?  Also,
      what is the age and gender of the child using each type of equipment?
      (RECORD ALL EQUIPMENT REGULARLY USED BY CHILD/CHILDREN 11 - 17 YEARS
      OLD.)

|Equipment            |Child's Age          |Child's Gender      |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |

12.   (IF Q. 5, CODE 2 CIRCLED, ASK) Does your spouse also regularly use
      any of the digital equipment owned by your household?

                             Yes  …………………………………………1
                             No   …………………………………………..2

13.   Which digital equipment does he/she use?

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                       Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                       MP3 player with memory card slot  …………..7


14.   I'm going to read you some issues you may consider when buying new
      technology.  As I read each pair of issues please tell me which one is
      more important to you.  When you purchase technology do you look for …
      (READ LIST.  ROTATE ORDER.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

|a.                  |The latest           |Proven technology    |
|                    |technology, OR       |                     |
|                    |(EARLY ADOPTER)      |                     |
|b.                  |The most features, OR|The lowest price     |
|                    |(EARLY ADOPTER)      |                     |
|c.                  |The highest quality, |The lowest price     |
|                    |OR                   |                     |
|d.                  |Brand reputation, OR |The lowest price     |



15.   I'm going to read you some statements and ask you to tell me how
      strongly you agree or disagree with each of them.  Please tell me if
      you strongly agree, agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree,
      disagree, or strongly disagree with the following statement.  (READ
      STATEMENTS.  ROTATE ORDER.  REPEAT SCALE AS OFTEN AS NECESSARY.
      CIRCLE APPROPRIATE RESPONSE. )

|                    |Strongl|       |S'mwhat|S'mwhat|       |Strongly|
|                    |y      |Disagre|Disagre|Agree  |Agree  |Agree   |
|                    |Disagre|e      |e      |       |       |        |
|                    |e      |       |       |       |       |        |
|a.  I don't like    |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|technology          |       |       |       |       |       |(TALLY/ |
|                    |       |       |       |       |       |TERM.)  |
|b.  I am always     |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|looking for new     |       |       |       |       |       |(EARLY  |
|ways to use         |       |       |       |       |       |ADOPTER)|
|technology          |       |       |       |       |       |        |
|c.  I stick with the|1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|tried and true.     |       |       |       |       |       |        |

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

16.   Which of the following phrases best describes you?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE CHOSEN STATEMENT.)

                       I couldn't function without technology …………………..1
                       I could function without technology, but would find
                             it very difficult.    ………………………………….2
                       I could easily function without technology, but
                             would rather not.     ……………………………….3
                       I  would just as easily function without technology.
      …….4
                       I would be better off without technology.  (TALLY &
                             TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

17.   How much do you understand about the technical aspects of how
      technology products work?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

                                  Nothing    …………………………………….1
                                  Very little      ……………………………………2
                                  Quite a bit      ………………………………….3
                                  A lot …………………………………………..4
                                  Everything (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

18.   In thinking about how you USE technology products, which of the
      following statements best describes you?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN
      RESPONSE.)

                       I don't know much about using technology products.
      …..1
                       I use technology products about as well as others.
      …….2
                       I use technology products better than others.
      …………..3
                       I use technology products better than just about
                             anybody else. (EARLY ADOPTER)……...…..4

19.   RECORD GENDER BY OBSERVATION

                                  Male  ………………………………………….1
                                  Female     ……………………………………..2

20.   We would like to talk to people of varying ethnic backgrounds and
      origins.  Which of the following best describes yours?

                                  White or Caucasian     ……………….………1
                                  Hispanic   ……………………………..…….2
                                  African American …………………….……3
                                  Asian      ……………………..………………...4

(Qs. 21 a-c ARE AN ARTICULATION SCREENER.  PLEASE TALLY & TERMINATE ANY
      RESPONDENTS WHO HAVE DIFFICULTY UNDERSTANDING OR RESPONDING TO THESE
      QUESTIONS, WHO SPEAK TOO SOFTLY, OR WHO HAVE AN EXTRAORDINARILY HARD
      TO UNDERSTAND ACCENT.)

21a.  Do you have any hobbies that involve using some type of technology?

                                  Yes (CONTINUE)   ………………………..1
                                  No (GO TO Q. 21c)      ………………………..2

21b.  What kind of hobbies do you have that involve using technology?  What
      do you like about them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________

21c.  What other kinds of hobbies do you have?  What do you like about
      them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________



                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

22.   QUALIFICATION:

      *(CHECK FOR EARLY ADOPTERS:)

      Q. 14a (Chose "latest technology")
      Q. 14b (Chose "most features")
      Q. 15b ("Strongly Agree")
      Q. 18 (Code 4)

      RESPONDENTS WHO MEET ONE OR TWO OF THESE CRITERIA MAY
      BE INVITED TO PARTICPATE.  RESPONDENTS WHO MEET THREE OR FOUR OF THE
      CRITERIA, SHOULD BE TALLIED AND TERMINATED.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

      *(CHECK IF SPOUSE QUALIFIES)

      Q. 13 (any item circled)

      SPOUSES SHOULD BE INVITED TO PARTICIPATE IN ANY CASE WHERE THEY ARE
      USERS OF THE RELAVENT TECHNOLOGY.

23.   We are conducting discussions with families who use digital equipment
      at our offices on DAY/DATE.  We would like to talk to you and your
      (AGE(S) FROM Q.   11) child/children. (IF SPOUSE ALSO QUALIFIES BASED
      ON Q. 13, SAY)  We would also like to include your spouse in the
      discussion, if that is possible.  (FOR ALL RESONDENTS) The discussion
      will take approximately one hour of your time and you will be paid
      $125 for your time and consideration.   Please be assured that this is
      not a sales presentation of any kind and you do not need to prepare
      anything for the discussion.  Would you be willing to participate?

                 Yes
      ..........................................................1
                 No (TERMINATE & KEEP)

      NOTE:  AT LEAST ONE PARENT AND ONE CHILD MUST BE ABLE TO PARTICIPATE.
       UP TO TWO PARENTS AND TWO CHILDREN MAY ATTEND.)

24.   (IF ABLE TO ATTEND, COMPLETE CONTACT INFORMATION ON THE FIRST PAGE.
      BE SURE TO INCLUDE NAMES OF ALL PARTICIPANTS.)

25.   (PROVIDE DIRECTIONS TO FACILITY)

26.   Thank you very much for your willingness to participate.  Only a few
      people are invited, and we are counting on your attendance.  We will
      send you a letter confirming the time of the meeting and providing
      directions to our offices. We will also call you the day before the
      session to remind you of the time.

      Please plan to arrive 10 to 15 minutes before the discussion.  Please
      bring your invitation, driver's license, and reading glasses (if you
      use them), when you come.  In the meantime, if you have any questions,
      please call ______________ at ___________ between 9 and 5.




Summary:

Recruit six (6) families (at least one parent accompanied by one child; but
up to two parents and two children) for five to show.






Location:              Date:
Downtown    ………………………………..1  Mon., June 9, 6:00 PM ……Grp. 1
Framingham  ………………………………2    Mon., June 9, 8:00 PM ……Grp. 2
            Tues., June 10, 7:00 PM     …Grp. 3

MEMORY CARD SCREENER — GROUPS


NAME:       ______________________________________________________

ADDRESS:    ______________________________________________________

            ______________________________________________________

PHONE/DAY:  ____________________        EVE: ______________________

Hello, my name is ___________ and I'm calling from Performance Plus, an
independent market research company located in the Boston area.  Today
we're conducting some research regarding digital technology and we'd like
to include your opinions.

1.    First of all, please tell me into which of the following categories
your age falls.

                 Under 18 (ASK FOR A HOUSEHOLD
                       MEMBER 18 OR OVER. BEGIN AGAIN.)
                 18 - 24     …………………………………………..1
                 25 - 39     …………………………………………..2
                 40 - 55     …………………………………………..3
                 56 - 70     …………………………………………4
                 71 or over (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                       0 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

2.    Are you, or is anyone in your household, currently employed in any of
      the following occupations?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                 Advertising, market research, or public relations
      ……………...1
                 Marketing or marketing communications for a company that
                       manufactures, distributes, or sells any type of high
      tech-
                       nology or consumer electronics products
      ………….……….2
                 Sales (either retail or wholesale) for a company that
      manufac-
                       tures or resells any type of high technology or
      consumer
                       electronics products  …………….……………………..…..…3

(IF "YES" TO ANY, TALLY & TERMINATE)         0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9


3.    Have you ever participated in a market research group discussion
      lasting more than half an hour?

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   …………………………….1
                       No (GO TO Q. 5)  ……………………………2

4.    About how long ago was that?

                       _____________________________________
                       (RECORD EXACT RESPONSE.  IF LESS
                       THAN SIX MONTHS AGO, TALLY & TER-
                       MINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9


5.    Please tell me which of the following items have been purchased by
      your household, for personal use.  (READ LIST.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  …………..7
                 (DO NOT READ)    None (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

6.    Are you, yourself, the principal user of any of the digital
      technology items your household owns?  By that I mean, do you use any
      of the items we just discussed more often than any other member of
      your household.

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   ……………………………..1
                       No (ASK FOR ANOTHER HOUSEHOLD
                             MEMBER, 18+, WHO IS THE
                             PRIMARY USER OF AT LEAST ONE
                             ITEM MENTIONED IN Q. 2.  IF NO ONE
                             AVAILABLE DURING STUDY PERIOD,
                             TALLY & TERMINATE.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

7.    Which  of these item(s) are you the principal user of? (CIRCLE
      APPROPRIATE
      ITEM(S) BELOW.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  …………7

8.    Which of the following items have you ever heard of?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                       USB Ports  ………………………………………1
                       Memory Cards     ………………………………….2
                       CD Rom     ………………………………………..3
                       Floppy disk drives    ……………………………..4

                       (IF CODE 2  -- MEMORY CARDS -- NOT
                       CIRCLED, TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

9.    I'm going to read you some issues you may consider when buying new
      technology.  As I read each pair of issues please tell me which one is
      more important to you.  When you purchase technology do you look for …
      (READ LIST.  ROTATE ORDER.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

|a.                  |The latest           |Proven technology    |
|                    |technology, OR       |(QUALIFIES FOR GRPS. |
|                    |(QUALIFIES FOR GRP 3)|1 and 2)             |
|b.                  |The most features, OR|The lowest price     |
|                    |(QUALIFIES FOR GRP 3)|(QUALFIES FOR GRPS   |
|                    |                     |1 and 2)             |
|c.                  |The highest quality, |The lowest price     |
|                    |OR                   |                     |
|d.                  |Brand reputation, OR |The lowest price     |



10.   I'm going to read you some statements and ask you to tell me how
      strongly you agree or disagree with each of them.  Please tell me if
      you strongly agree, agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree,
      disagree, or strongly disagree with the following statement.  (READ
      STATEMENTS.  ROTATE ORDER.  REPEAT SCALE AS OFTEN AS NECESSARY.
      CIRCLE APPROPRIATE RESPONSE. )

|                     |Strongl|       |S'mwhat|S'mwhat|       |Strongl|
|                     |y      |Disagre|Disagre|Agree  |Agree  |y      |
|                     |Disagre|e      |e      |       |       |Agree  |
|                     |e      |       |       |       |       |       |
|a.  I don't like     |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6      |
|technology           |       |       |       |       |       |(TALLY/|
|                     |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|                     |       |       |       |       |       |TERM.) |
|b.  I am always      |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6      |
|looking for new      |       |       |       |       |       |(QUAL. |
|ways to use          |       |       |       |       |       |FOR GRP|
|technology           |       |       |       |       |       |3)     |
|c.  I stick with the |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6      |
|tried and true.      |       |       |       |       |       |       |

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

11.   Which of the following phrases best describes you?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE CHOSEN STATEMENT.)

                       I couldn't function without technology …………………..1
                       I could function without technology, but would find
                             it very difficult.    ………………………………….2
                       I could easily function without technology, but
                             would rather not.     ……………………………….3
                       I  would just as easily function without technology.
      …….4
                       I would be better off without technology.  (TALLY &
                             TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

12.   How much do you understand about the technical aspects of how
      technology products work?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

                                  Nothing    …………………………………….1
                                  Very little      ……………………………………2
                                  Quite a bit      ………………………………….3
                                  A lot …………………………………………..4
                                  Everything (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

13.   In thinking about how you USE technology products, which of the
      following statements best describes you?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN
      RESPONSE.)

                       I don't know much about using technology products.
      …..1
                       I use technology products about as well as others.
      …….2
                       I use technology products better than others.
      …………..3
                       I use technology products better than just about
                             anybody else. (QUALIFIES FOR GRP 3)    …..4

14.   Which of the following statements best describes your personal living
      situation at this time?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.  CHECK
      QUOTAS.)

      (IF QUOTA FILLED,           I am currently living alone ………………..…1
      TALLY & TERMINATE)
                             I am currently living with a spouse or
                                  significant other      ……………………………2
                                  I am currently living with my spouse and
                                     children who are under 18
                                     ………………..3
                             I am currently living with my children
                                  who are under 18 …………………………4
                             I am currently living with roommates
                                  or other unrelated adults   ………………..5

                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9



15.   RECORD GENDER BY OBSERVATION

                                  Male  ………………………………………….1
                                  Female     ……………………………………..2

16.   We would like to talk to people of varying ethnic backgrounds and
      origins.  Which of the following best describes yours?

                                  White or Caucasian     ……………….………1
                                  Hispanic   ……………………………..…….2
                                  African American …………………….……3
                                  Asian      ……………………..………………...4

(Qs. 17a - c ARE AN ARTICULATION SCREENER.  PLEASE TALLY & TERMINATE ANY
      RESPONDENTS WHO HAVE DIFFICULTY UNDERSTANDING OR RESPONDING TO THESE
      QUESTIONS, WHO SPEAK TOO SOFTLY, OR WHO HAVE AN EXTRAORDINARILY HARD
      TO UNDERSTAND ACCENT.)
17a.  Do you have any hobbies that involve using some type of technology?

                                  Yes (CONTINUE)   ………………………..1
                                  No (GO TO Q. 17c)      ………………………..2

17b.  What kind of hobbies do you have that involve using technology?  What
      do you like about them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________

17c.  What other kinds of hobbies do you have?  What do you like about
      them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________



                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

18.   (CHECK FOR RESPONDENTS WHO QUALIFY FOR GROUP 3  --EARLY ADOPTERS:

      Q. 9a (Chose "latest technology")
      Q. 9b (Chose "most features")
      Q. 10b ("Strongly Agree")
      Q. 13 (Code 4)

      (RESPONDENTS WHO MEET ALL CRITERIA SHOULD BE INVITED TO GROUP 3.

      RESPONDENTS WHO MEET ONE OR TWO OF THESE CRITERIA MAY
      BE INVITED TO GRPS 1 OR 2.  RESPONDENTS WHO MEET THREE OF THE FOUR
      CRITERIA, SHOULD BE TALLIED AND TERMINATED.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

19.   We are conducting a group discussion about digital technology on
      (DAY/DATE/TIME) at our offices in Boston/Framingham.  The discussion
      will take approximately two hours of your time and you will be paid
      $65 for your time and consideration.  (FOR 6 PM RESPONDENTS ONLY) A
      light dinner will be served before the session.  (FOR ALL RESPONDENTS)
      Please be assured that this is not a sales presentation of any kind
      and you do not need to prepare anything for the discussion.  Would you
      be willing to participate?

                 Yes
      ..........................................................1
                 No (TERMINATE & KEEP)

20.   (IF ABLE TO ATTEND, COMPLETE CONTACT INFORMATION ON THE FIRST PAGE.)

21.   (PROVIDE DIRECTIONS TO FACILITY)

22.   Thank you very much for your willingness to participate.  Only a few
      people are invited, and we are counting on your attendance.  We will
      send you a letter confirming the time of the meeting and providing
      directions to our offices. We will also call you the day before the
      session to remind you of the time.

      Please plan to arrive 10 to 15 minutes before the discussion.  Please
      bring your invitation, driver's license, and reading glasses (if you
      use them), when you come.  In the meantime, if you have any questions,
      please call ______________ at ___________ between 9 and 5.



SUMMARY:

Recruit three (3) groups of respondents (12 for 8 - 10 to show)

Grps. 1 and 2 (June 9th) are at the Downtown Boston/Faneuil Hall Facility
Grp. 3 - Early Adopters (June 10th) is at the Framingham Facility

Please recruit a mix of ages (Q. 1), genders (Q. 15), and races (Q. 16).

QUOTA FOR EACH GROUP:  Recruit no more than four (4) respondents living
alone (Q. 14, CODE 1).








                 Date/Time:
            Mon., June 23 ________________
            Tues., June 24 ________________



SAN DIEGO MEMORY CARD SCREENER — IDI's


NAMES:      ______________________________________________________

ADDRESS:    ______________________________________________________

            ______________________________________________________

PHONE/DAY:  ____________________        EVE: ______________________

Hello, my name is ___________ and I'm calling from Taylor Research, an
independent market research company located in San Diego.  Today we're
conducting some research regarding digital technology and we'd like to
include your opinions.

1.    First of all, please tell me into which of the following categories
your age falls.

                 Under 18 (ASK FOR A HOUSEHOLD
                       MEMBER 18 OR OVER. BEGIN AGAIN.)
                 18 - 24     …………………………………………..1
                 25 - 39     …………………………………………..2
                 40 - 55     …………………………………………..3
                 56 - 70     …………………………………………4
                 71 or over (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                       0 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

2.    Are you, or is anyone in your household, currently employed in any of
      the following occupations?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                 Advertising, market research, or public relations
      ……………...1
                 Marketing or marketing communications for a company that
                       manufactures, distributes, or sells any type of high
      tech-
                       nology or consumer electronics products
      ………….……….2
                 Sales (either retail or wholesale) for a company that
      manufac-
                       tures or resells any type of high technology or
      consumer
                       electronics products  …………….……………………..…..…3

(IF "YES" TO ANY, TALLY & TERMINATE)         0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9


3.    Have you ever participated in a market research group discussion
      lasting more than half an hour?

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   …………………………….1
                       No (GO TO Q. 5)  ……………………………2

4.    About how long ago was that?

                       _____________________________________
                       (RECORD EXACT RESPONSE.  IF LESS
                       THAN SIX MONTHS AGO, TALLY & TER-
                       MINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

5.    Which of the following statements best describes your personal living
      situation at this time?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSES.)

                             I am currently living alone …..………………1
                             I am currently living with my spouse…...……2
                                  I am currently living with children who
                                        are 10 years of age or younger
                                     ….……..3
                             I am currently living with children
                                  who are 11 to 17 years of age……………4
                             I am currently living with roommates
                                  or other unrelated adults   ………………..5

(IF CODE 4 NOT CIRCLED,
TALLY & TERMINATE)            0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

6.    Please tell me which of the following items have been purchased by
      your household, for personal use.  (READ LIST.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  …………..7
                 (DO NOT READ)    None (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

7.    Are you, yourself, the principal user of any of the digital
      technology items your household owns?  By that I mean, do you use any
      of the items we just discussed more often than any other member of
      your household.

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   ……………………………..1
                       No (ASK FOR ANOTHER PARENT WHO IS
                             THE PRIMARY USER OF AT LEAST ONE
                             ITEM MENTIONED IN Q. 6.  IF NO ONE
                             AVAILABLE DURING STUDY PERIOD,
                             TALLY & TERMINATE.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

8.    Which  of these item(s) are you the principal user of? (CIRCLE
      APPROPRIATE
      ITEM(S) BELOW.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  ………….7

9.    Which of the following items have you ever heard of?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                       USB Ports  ………………………………………1
                       Memory Cards     ………………………………….2
                       CD Rom     ………………………………………..3
                       Floppy disk drives    ……………………………..4

      (IF CODE 2  -- MEMORY CARDS --
      NOT  CIRCLED, TALLY & TERMINATE)  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

10.   You mentioned that you have a child/children, aged 11 to 17 living in
      your household.  Is that child/are any of those children also regular
      users of any of the digital equipment your household owns?

                       Yes (CONTINUE)
                       No (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9



11.   Which digital equipment does your child/do your children use?  Also,
      what is the age and gender of the child using each type of equipment?
      (RECORD ALL EQUIPMENT REGULARLY USED BY CHILD/CHILDREN 11 - 17 YEARS
      OLD.)

|Equipment            |Child's Age          |Child's Gender      |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |
|                     |                     |                    |
|____________________ |____________________ |__________________  |

12.   (IF Q. 5, CODE 2 CIRCLED, ASK) Does your spouse also regularly use
      any of the digital equipment owned by your household?

                             Yes  …………………………………………1
                             No   …………………………………………..2

13.   Which digital equipment does he/she use?

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                       Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                       MP3 player with memory card slot  …………..7


14.   I'm going to read you some issues you may consider when buying new
      technology.  As I read each pair of issues please tell me which one is
      more important to you.  When you purchase technology do you look for …
      (READ LIST.  ROTATE ORDER.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

|a.                  |The latest           |Proven technology    |
|                    |technology, OR       |                     |
|                    |*(EARLY ADOPTER)     |                     |
|b.                  |The most features, OR|The lowest price     |
|                    |*(EARLY ADOPTER)     |                     |
|c.                  |The highest quality, |The lowest price     |
|                    |OR                   |                     |
|d.                  |Brand reputation, OR |The lowest price     |



15.   I'm going to read you some statements and ask you to tell me how
      strongly you agree or disagree with each of them.  Please tell me if
      you strongly agree, agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree,
      disagree, or strongly disagree with the following statement.  (READ
      STATEMENTS.  ROTATE ORDER.  REPEAT SCALE AS OFTEN AS NECESSARY.
      CIRCLE APPROPRIATE RESPONSE. )

|                    |Strongl|       |S'mwhat|S'mwhat|       |Strongly|
|                    |y      |Disagre|Disagre|Agree  |Agree  |Agree   |
|                    |Disagre|e      |e      |       |       |        |
|                    |e      |       |       |       |       |        |
|a.  I don't like    |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|technology          |       |       |       |       |       |(TALLY/ |
|                    |       |       |       |       |       |TERM.)  |
|b.  I am always     |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|looking for new     |       |       |       |       |       |*(EARLY |
|ways to use         |       |       |       |       |       |ADOPTER)|
|technology          |       |       |       |       |       |        |
|c.  I stick with the|1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|tried and true.     |       |       |       |       |       |        |

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

16.   Which of the following phrases best describes you?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE CHOSEN STATEMENT.)

                       I couldn't function without technology …………………..1
                       I could function without technology, but would find
                             it very difficult.    ………………………………….2
                       I could easily function without technology, but
                             would rather not.     ……………………………….3
                       I  would just as easily function without technology.
      …….4
                       I would be better off without technology.  (TALLY &
                             TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

17.   How much do you understand about the technical aspects of how
      technology products work?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

                                  Nothing    …………………………………….1
                                  Very little      ……………………………………2
                                  Quite a bit      ………………………………….3
                                  A lot …………………………………………..4
                                  Everything (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

18.   In thinking about how you USE technology products, which of the
      following statements best describes you?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN
      RESPONSE.)

                       I don't know much about using technology products.
      …..1
                       I use technology products about as well as others.
      …….2
                       I use technology products better than others.
      …………..3
                       I use technology products better than just about
                             anybody else. *(EARLY ADOPTER)……...…..4

19.   RECORD GENDER BY OBSERVATION

                                  Male  ………………………………………….1
                                  Female     ……………………………………..2

20.   We would like to talk to people of varying ethnic backgrounds and
      origins.  Which of the following best describes yours?

                                  White or Caucasian     ……………….………1
                                  Hispanic   ……………………………..…….2
                                  African American …………………….……3
                                  Asian      ……………………..………………...4

(Qs. 21 a-c ARE AN ARTICULATION SCREENER.  PLEASE TALLY & TERMINATE ANY
      RESPONDENTS WHO HAVE DIFFICULTY UNDERSTANDING OR RESPONDING TO THESE
      QUESTIONS, WHO SPEAK TOO SOFTLY, OR WHO HAVE AN EXTRAORDINARILY HARD
      TO UNDERSTAND ACCENT.)

21a.  Do you have any hobbies that involve using some type of technology?

                                  Yes (CONTINUE)   ………………………..1
                                  No (GO TO Q. 21c)      ………………………..2

21b.  What kind of hobbies do you have that involve using technology?  What
      do you like about them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________

21c.  What other kinds of hobbies do you have?  What do you like about
      them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________



                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

22.   QUALIFICATION:

      *(CHECK FOR EARLY ADOPTERS:)

      Q. 14a (Chose "latest technology")
      Q. 14b (Chose "most features")
      Q. 15b ("Strongly Agree")
      Q. 18 (Code 4)

      RESPONDENTS WHO MEET ONE OR TWO OF THESE CRITERIA MAY
      BE INVITED TO PARTICPATE.  RESPONDENTS WHO MEET THREE OR FOUR OF THE
      CRITERIA, SHOULD BE TALLIED AND TERMINATED.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

      *(CHECK IF SPOUSE QUALIFIES)

      Q. 13 (any item circled)

      SPOUSES SHOULD BE INVITED TO PARTICIPATE IN ANY CASE WHERE THEY ARE
      USERS OF THE RELAVENT TECHNOLOGY.

23.   We are conducting discussions with families who use digital equipment
      at our offices on DAY/DATE.  We would like to talk to you and your
      (AGE(S) FROM Q.   11) child/children. (IF SPOUSE ALSO QUALIFIES BASED
      ON Q. 13, SAY)  We would also like to include your spouse in the
      discussion, if that is possible.  (FOR ALL RESONDENTS) The discussion
      will take approximately one hour of your time and you will be paid
      $100 for your time and consideration.   Please be assured that this is
      not a sales presentation of any kind and you do not need to prepare
      anything for the discussion.  Would you be willing to participate?

                 Yes
      ..........................................................1
                 No (TERMINATE & KEEP)

      NOTE:  AT LEAST ONE PARENT AND ONE CHILD MUST BE ABLE TO PARTICIPATE.
       UP TO TWO PARENTS AND TWO CHILDREN MAY ATTEND.)

24.   (IF ABLE TO ATTEND, COMPLETE CONTACT INFORMATION ON THE FIRST PAGE.
      BE SURE TO INCLUDE NAMES OF ALL PARTICIPANTS.)

25.   (PROVIDE DIRECTIONS TO FACILITY)

26.   Thank you very much for your willingness to participate.  Only a few
      people are invited, and we are counting on your attendance.  We will
      send you a letter confirming the time of the meeting and providing
      directions to our offices. We will also call you the day before the
      session to remind you of the time.

      Please plan to arrive 10 to 15 minutes before the discussion.  Please
      bring your invitation, driver's license, and reading glasses (if you
      use them), when you come.  In the meantime, if you have any questions,
      please call ______________ at ___________ between 9 and 5.




Summary:

Recruit six (6) families (at least one parent accompanied by one child; but
up to two parents and two children) for five to show.




                 Date:                  Mon., June 23, 6:00 PM      ……Grp.
1
            Mon., June 23, 8:00 PM      ……Grp. 2
            Tues., June 24, 7:00 PM     …Grp. 3

MEMORY CARD SCREENER — SAN DIEGO GROUPS


NAME:       ______________________________________________________

ADDRESS:    ______________________________________________________

            ______________________________________________________

PHONE/DAY:  ____________________        EVE: ______________________

Hello, my name is ___________ and I'm calling from Taylor Research, an
independent market research company located in San Diego.  Today we're
conducting some research regarding digital technology and we'd like to
include your opinions.

1.    First of all, please tell me into which of the following categories
your age falls.

                 Under 18 (ASK FOR A HOUSEHOLD
                       MEMBER 18 OR OVER. BEGIN AGAIN.)
                 18 - 24     …………………………………………..1
                 25 - 39     …………………………………………..2
                 40 - 55     …………………………………………..3
                 56 - 70     …………………………………………4
                 71 or over (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                       0 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

2.    Are you, or is anyone in your household, currently employed in any of
      the following occupations?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                 Advertising, market research, or public relations
      ……………...1
                 Marketing or marketing communications for a company that
                       manufactures, distributes, or sells any type of high
      tech-
                       nology or consumer electronics products
      ………….……….2
                 Sales (either retail or wholesale) for a company that
      manufac-
                       tures or resells any type of high technology or
      consumer
                       electronics products  …………….……………………..…..…3

(IF "YES" TO ANY, TALLY & TERMINATE)         0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

3.    Have you ever participated in a market research group discussion
      lasting more than half an hour?

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   …………………………….1
                       No (GO TO Q. 5)  ……………………………2

4.    About how long ago was that?

                       _____________________________________
                       (RECORD EXACT RESPONSE.  IF LESS
                       THAN SIX MONTHS AGO, TALLY & TER-
                       MINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9


5.    Please tell me which of the following items have been purchased by
      your household, for personal use.  (READ LIST.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  …………..7
                 (DO NOT READ)    None (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

6.    Are you, yourself, the principal user of any of the digital
      technology items your household owns?  By that I mean, do you use any
      of the items we just discussed more often than any other member of
      your household.

                       Yes (CONTINUE)   ……………………………..1
                       No (ASK FOR ANOTHER HOUSEHOLD
                             MEMBER, 18+, WHO IS THE
                             PRIMARY USER OF AT LEAST ONE
                             ITEM MENTIONED IN Q. 2.  IF NO ONE
                             AVAILABLE DURING STUDY PERIOD,
                             TALLY & TERMINATE.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

7.    Which  of these item(s) are you the principal user of? (CIRCLE
      APPROPRIATE
      ITEM(S) BELOW.)

                 Video Cam Recorder     ………………………….1
                 Personal Digital Assistant (PDA)  …………….2
                 A printer which uses a memory card      ………3
                 Digital Camera   …………………………………4
                 A HP Media Center PC   ………………………5
                 Notebook PC with a memory card    ……….6
                 MP3 player with memory card slot  …………7

8.    Which of the following items have you ever heard of?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY.)

                       USB Ports  ………………………………………1
                       Memory Cards     ………………………………….2
                       CD Rom     ………………………………………..3
                       Floppy disk drives    ……………………………..4

                       (IF CODE 2  -- MEMORY CARDS -- NOT
                       CIRCLED, TALLY & TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

9.    I'm going to read you some issues you may consider when buying new
      technology.  As I read each pair of issues please tell me which one is
      more important to you.  When you purchase technology do you look for …
      (READ LIST.  ROTATE ORDER.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

|a.                  |The latest           |Proven technology    |
|                    |technology, OR       |                     |
|                    |*(EARLY ADOPTER)     |                     |
|b.                  |The most features, OR|The lowest price     |
|                    |*(EARLY ADOPTER)     |                     |
|c.                  |The highest quality, |The lowest price     |
|                    |OR                   |                     |
|d.                  |Brand reputation, OR |The lowest price     |



10.   I'm going to read you some statements and ask you to tell me how
      strongly you agree or disagree with each of them.  Please tell me if
      you strongly agree, agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree,
      disagree, or strongly disagree with the following statement.  (READ
      STATEMENTS.  ROTATE ORDER.  REPEAT SCALE AS OFTEN AS NECESSARY.
      CIRCLE APPROPRIATE RESPONSE. )

|                    |Strongl|       |S'mwhat|S'mwhat|       |Strongly|
|                    |y      |Disagre|Disagre|Agree  |Agree  |Agree   |
|                    |Disagre|e      |e      |       |       |        |
|                    |e      |       |       |       |       |        |
|a.  I don't like    |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|technology          |       |       |       |       |       |(TALLY/ |
|                    |       |       |       |       |       |TERM.)  |
|b.  I am always     |1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|looking for new     |       |       |       |       |       |*(EARLY |
|ways to use         |       |       |       |       |       |ADOPTER)|
|technology          |       |       |       |       |       |        |
|c.  I stick with the|1      |2      |3      |4      |5      |6       |
|tried and true.     |       |       |       |       |       |        |

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

11.   Which of the following phrases best describes you?  (READ LIST.
      CIRCLE CHOSEN STATEMENT.)

                       I couldn't function without technology …………………..1
                       I could function without technology, but would find
                             it very difficult.    ………………………………….2
                       I could easily function without technology, but
                             would rather not.     ……………………………….3
                       I  would just as easily function without technology.
      …….4
                       I would be better off without technology.  (TALLY &
                             TERMINATE)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

12.   How much do you understand about the technical aspects of how
      technology products work?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.)

                                  Nothing    …………………………………….1
                                  Very little      ……………………………………2
                                  Quite a bit      ………………………………….3
                                  A lot …………………………………………..4
                                  Everything (TALLY & TERMINATE)

                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

13.   In thinking about how you USE technology products, which of the
      following statements best describes you?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN
      RESPONSE.)

                       I don't know much about using technology products.
      …..1
                       I use technology products about as well as others.
      …….2
                       I use technology products better than others.
      …………..3
                       I use technology products better than just about
                             anybody else. *(EARLY ADOPTER)   ………...4

14.   Which of the following statements best describes your personal living
      situation at this time?  (READ LIST.  CIRCLE CHOSEN RESPONSE.  CHECK
      QUOTAS.)

      (IF QUOTA FILLED,           I am currently living alone ………………..…1
      TALLY & TERMINATE)
                             I am currently living with a spouse or
                                  significant other      ……………………………2
                                  I am currently living with my spouse and
                                     children who are under 18
                                     ………………..3
                             I am currently living with my children
                                  who are under 18 …………………………4
                             I am currently living with roommates
                                  or other unrelated adults   ………………..5

                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9



15.   RECORD GENDER BY OBSERVATION

                                  Male  ………………………………………….1
                                  Female     ……………………………………..2

16.   We would like to talk to people of varying ethnic backgrounds and
      origins.  Which of the following best describes yours?

                                  White or Caucasian     ……………….………1
                                  Hispanic   ……………………………..…….2
                                  African American …………………….……3
                                  Asian      ……………………..………………...4

(Qs. 17a - c ARE AN ARTICULATION SCREENER.  PLEASE TALLY & TERMINATE ANY
      RESPONDENTS WHO HAVE DIFFICULTY UNDERSTANDING OR RESPONDING TO THESE
      QUESTIONS, WHO SPEAK TOO SOFTLY, OR WHO HAVE AN EXTRAORDINARILY HARD
      TO UNDERSTAND ACCENT.)
17a.  Do you have any hobbies that involve using some type of technology?

                                  Yes (CONTINUE)   ………………………..1
                                  No (GO TO Q. 17c)      ………………………..2

17b.  What kind of hobbies do you have that involve using technology?  What
      do you like about them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________

17c.  What other kinds of hobbies do you have?  What do you like about
      them?

      _______________________________________________________________

      _______________________________________________________________



                                  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

18.   (CHECK FOR *EARLY ADOPTERS, DEFINED BELOW):

      Q. 9a (Chose "latest technology")
      Q. 9b (Chose "most features")
      Q. 10b ("Strongly Agree")
      Q. 13 (Code 4)

      (RESPONDENTS WHO MEET ONE OR TWO OF THESE CRITERIA MAY
      BE INVITED TO PARTICPATE.  RESPONDENTS WHO MEET THREE OR FOUR OF THE
      CRITERIA, SHOULD BE TALLIED AND TERMINATED.
      WE ARE NOT LOOKING FOR EARLY ADOPTERS.)

                             0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9

19.   We are conducting a group discussion about digital technology on
      (DAY/DATE/TIME) at our offices in San Diego.  The discussion will take
      approximately two hours of your time and you will be paid $60 for your
      time and consideration.  (FOR 6 PM RESPONDENTS ONLY) A light dinner
      will be served before the session.  (FOR ALL RESPONDENTS) Please be
      assured that this is not a sales presentation of any kind and you do
      not need to prepare anything for the discussion.  Would you be willing
      to participate?

                 Yes
      ..........................................................1
                 No (TERMINATE & KEEP)

20.   (IF ABLE TO ATTEND, COMPLETE CONTACT INFORMATION ON THE FIRST PAGE.)

21.   (PROVIDE DIRECTIONS TO FACILITY)

22.   Thank you very much for your willingness to participate.  Only a few
      people are invited, and we are counting on your attendance.  We will
      send you a letter confirming the time of the meeting and providing
      directions to our offices. We will also call you the day before the
      session to remind you of the time.

      Please plan to arrive 10 to 15 minutes before the discussion.  Please
      bring your invitation, driver's license, and reading glasses (if you
      use them), when you come.  In the meantime, if you have any questions,
      please call ______________ at ___________ between 9 and 5.







SUMMARY:

Recruit three (3) groups of respondents (12 for 8 - 10 to show)

Please recruit a mix of ages (Q. 1), genders (Q. 15), and races (Q. 16).

QUOTA FOR EACH GROUP:  Recruit no more than four (4) respondents living
alone (Q. 14, CODE 1).









Section break (see below) should be at the bottom of the second-to-last
page.






