Major Account Plan:  IBM (excluding Global Services)

1.  Overall Current Assessment
Through six months, we had $31,000 in revenue versus $491,000 for the year 2000.  On the down side, IBM has been locked down to us for new purchase orders for two quarters, and sales exec Cindy Murray  was on maternity leave.  On the plus side, the major account process is surfacing more opportunities into new areas, such as a six-figure proposal to IBM’s primary market research department.

In spite of considerable executive effort and attention by Sales, we have been unable to get our value proposition in front of key IBM line executives.  In addition, we have suffered from IBM’s apparent historic experience that Aberdeen was a white-paper company at a time when white-papers are an IBM expendable budget item.  

In spite of this lack of success, Aberdeen Group should continue to invest in marketing to IBM.  The company is a leader or player in virtually all of our practice areas.  And IBM is an industry survivor.  Our success at IBM could leverage to a dozen or more pods, a huge payback.  Thus, with Cindy back, we should redouble our efforts at IBM.
2.  Strategy and 18-Month Goals
IBM revenue into every practice area (e.g., pod)


Move the mix from white-papers to ETI content/primary research and Core retainers and consulting
Grow revenues to a $750K run rate by Q4-2002
Be known, respected and quoted by IBM general managers
3.  Recommended Approach
Financial Approach
Q4-2001 Objectives & Approach
Book $150,000 MAS and content deal.  Close our proposal.
Book $100,000 in Core projects.  One-half identified today.
Find out what we have to do to get business back in Server group
Capabilities briefing to IBM Software (Tivoli & WebSphere)
2002 Objectives & Approach
Revenue of $125K, $150K, $175K, $200K in Q1-Q4.
Mix: 20% ETI, 35% amplification, 20% retainers; 25% consulting
Get a plan from every practice area manager and execute.
Non-Financial Approach
Q3/4-2001 – Aberdeen corporate capabilities presentation 
Use Linda Sanford lever to rest of IBM executive team.  Keep her engaged (example:  Sept. 5 voicemail by Peter offer to brief her on Aberdeen’s analysis of HP-Compaq deal).
Use 20%-25% of Cindy’s time on IBM through Q1, then measure effectiveness.
Use Peter where appropriate in briefings, projects and sales.
Try to approach IBM on multiple projects tied to a single IBM initiative, such as eLiza, pervasive computing or WebSphere infrastructure.
Attend all IBM analyst conferences and analyst briefings.
4.  Investment Recommendations
Brief Linda Sanford quarterly plus ad hoc event conference calls (i.e., HP acquires Compaq).
Dedicate 10% of Peter to IBM business development
Brief Somers analyst relations team en masse once or twice.
Invest up to one man-month in ETI research associate time to map IBM’s research programs and product campaigns.  Use as war-room input for both strategic and tactical planning.

Prepared By:  Peter Kastner, Cindy Murray, Ed Black