SOURCE_URL: http://www.macnewsworld.com/story/34669.html
MIME: text/html

Mac News: Computers: US Army Drafts Apple Xserve for Supercomputer E-BUSINESS | TECHNOLOGY | CLASSIFIEDS [NEW] | CRM | LINUX | MAC | ECTNEWS.COM Welcome | Sign In Computers Business AAPL Financial International Legal Apple Juice Computers Enterprise Systems Desktops Notebooks Consumer Accessories Apple Retail iPhone iPod iTunes Store Security Hacks & Malware Mobile Security Security Updates Software Creative Tools Gaming Mac Apps Mobile Apps OS X Virtualization Reviews Reader Services Account Management Become an Affiliate Discussion Free Classifieds News Alerts Newsletters RSS / Headline Feeds Site Maps ECT News Network Map CRM Buyer Site Map E-Commerce Times Site Map LinuxInsider Site Map MacNewsWorld Site Map TechNewsWorld Site Map Search ECT News Network | Tech Blog June 16, 2009 01:38:17 PM MacNewsWorld > Computers | Read Next Article in Computers Please note that this material is copyright protected. It is illegal to display or reproduce this article without permission for any commercial purpose, including use as marketing or public relations literature. To obtain reprints of this article for authorized use, please call a sales representative at (818) 461-9700 or visit http://www.ectnews.com/about/reprints/ . US Army Drafts Apple Xserve for Supercomputer Print Version E-Mail Article Reprints By Blane Warrene MacNewsWorld 06/22/04 11:09 AM PT Aberdeen analyst Peter Kastner told MacNewsWorld that Apple's contract with COLSA is a wakeup call to those who watch the supercomputing sector. "With this deal, Apple has shown they are not a one-shot wonder, but a force to be reckoned with," Kastner said. COLSA, a government technology provider with 800 employees and offices in five states, will use the system for the U.S. Army Research and Development Command. Free White Paper from Macrovision: Learn how to drive consumer engagement with entertainment metadata. Click here to download. Apple (Nasdaq: AAPL) announced late Monday that it had entered into an agreement to provide a U.S. Army contractor with a supercomputer made up of 1,566 dual-processor G5 Xserves running Mac OS X Panther Server. COLSA Corporation commissioned the supercomputer, known as the MACH 5, which stands for "multiple advanced computers for hypersonic research." "We are building this -- hardware, software, labor and all -- for [US]$5.8 million, a fraction of the cost of what others have paid to build supercomputers," Anthony DiRienzo, executive vice president at COLSA, told MacNewsWorld. Huntsville, Alabama-based COLSA, a government technology provider with 800 employees and offices in five states, will use the system for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) research for hypersonic flight for the U.S. Army Research and Development Command. According COLSA, the multinode supercomputer should be online sometime this fall. NASA and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) also are expected to benefit from the new computer through joint projects with the U.S. Army. CFD is the process in which data is analyzed for modeling aerothermodynamics, or external flow over vehicle shapes. Apple's Sweet Home Alabama For his part, DiRienzo credits strong support from Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Alabama), a member of Subcommittees on Defense and Homeland Security, for furthering the MACH 5 project. In an e-mail message, Sen. Shelby told MacNewsWorld he is a proud sponsor of initiatives like the MACH 5. "As scientists and engineers push the bounds of modern technology, and our military systems grow in complexity, I believe it is important to ensure that our armed forces have access to the tools they need to succeed," Sen. Shelby wrote. "I am pleased to support federal funding that allows us to make the necessary investments today to enable the development of future technologies designed to transform not just our military capabilities but also commercial applications," he continued. COLSA might well consider Shelby its guardian angel. When MacNewsWorld contacted two Alabama state representatives, Albert Hall and Laura Hall (no relation), both of whom hold office in the district in which Huntsville sits, neither could offer any information on COLSA -- nor even knew about the contractor. "What is a 'supercomputer'?" Rep. Albert Hall went so far as to ask this reporter. Apple No One-Shot Wonder Apple won the contract with COLSA after going through a vendor evaluation process along with five other potential providers. According to DiRienzo, COLSA needed a solution with a small footprint, offering high performance at a lower cost and requiring minimal power. DiRienzo believes the MACH 5 should be one of the fastest supercomputers in the world -- and according to the most recent Top 500 Supercomputers List , maintained in part by the U.S. Department of Energy, the MACH 5 would rank second, providing up to 25 teraflops of computing power per second. In an interview with MacNewsWorld, Peter Kastner, executive vice president and chief research officer at Aberdeen Group , said this is a wakeup call to those who watch the supercomputing sector. "With this deal with COLSA, Apple has shown they are not a one-shot wonder, but a force to be reckoned with," he said, referencing Apple's debut supercomputing effort at Virginia Tech in 2003. "This is 'Moore's Law of Supercomputers," Kastner added. "Building custom systems is now totally uneconomical. All future systems of this nature will be built from industry-standard components." The number one supercomputer in the world, Japan's earth simulator, was built at a cost of $350 million, a 98 percent price premium to the MACH 5, which has the potential to land in the number two spot the next time these rankings are compiled. "High-performance computing is now totally price-elastic," Kastner continued. "[The MACH 5] offers power at $250,000 per teraflop." Kastner identified the chips of record in high-performance computing as IBM's (NYSE: IBM) PowerPC, including the G5 used by Apple, and Intel's (Nasdaq: INTC) architecture, which holds 268 spots on the Top 500 list . Future High-Performance Applications DiRienzo went on to say that COLSA is planning to put the Xserve G5 nodes into 42 racks, where they will need 150 tons of air pumped in to cool the system. He also said the supercomputer will run on Gigabit Ethernet because this project is more processor-intensive, rather than network-intensive. According to DiRienzo, the MACH5 will process massive amounts of data for its client, reducing months of numbers crunching to hours. "We came in when data analysis was taking six months and reduced it to one month," DiRienzo said. "This setup will be processing the data overnight." Kastner believes this is essential to reducing time to market on technologies and also to the "mainstreaming" of high-performance computing outside of government research and development. "There are uses on Wall Street, where processing derivatives seconds faster than the competition can mean millions in profit, in the electronics industry for designing and testing circuit boards, and in media and entertainment for digital rendering," Kastner pointed out. Kastner said that it boils down to speeding up the iterations of data -- reducing the number of months and years it takes to analyze data for a product. "If it takes three days to predict tomorrow's weather, what good is it?" he said. Social Networking Toolbox: ShareThis Next Article in Computers: Terra Soft CEO Kai Staats on Linux and the Mac Talkback: Be the first to comment on this story. Print Version E-Mail Article Reprints More by Blane Warrene Related Stories COLSA To Build Apple Xserve Supercomputer (22-Jun-04) Terra Soft CEO Kai Staats on Linux and the Mac (22-Jun-04) Apple Remodels 'Remote Desktop' for the Enterprise (21-Jun-04) Five Steps to Apple Enterprise Success (15-Jun-04) Power Mac G5 So Cool (10-Jun-04) Related News Alerts Apple Activate Alert | Search Archives NASA Activate Alert | Search Archives IBM Activate Alert | Search Archives Intel Activate Alert | Search Archives More Stories by Blane Warrene New Book Offers Tips for Aspiring OS X Experts (17-Mar-05) Administrators Urged To Defend Systems Passwords (24-Feb-05) Navigating Open-Source Licenses Can Be Tough Task (21-Feb-05) [Search More...] Don't miss a story -- sign up for our FREE e-mail newsletters and view the latest headlines at a glance. Tech News Flash [ View Sample ] E-Commerce Minute [ View Sample ] ECT News Network Weekly Newsletter [ View Sample ] Shortcuts Get Business and Technology News Alerts Most Popular | Spotlight Features | Exclusives This Week on ECT News Network | Podcasts WiFi Hotspot Locator Inside MacNewsWorld Free White Papers Avoiding HR Speak and Addressing Core Business Needs Power Integrity Effects of High Density Interconnect (HDI) Empower Your Consumer Research Department with Predictive Analysis 2009 Top 10 IT Service Management (ITSM) Vendor Report - Independent Research Making Large UPS Systems More Efficient MacNewsWorld Virgin Serves Up MP3 Buffet Glad Works Makes Marketing Moves Through iPhone Apps Safari 4 Goes to Eleven WWDC: iPhone Invigorated, Snow Leopard Spruced, AT&T Tarnished Should You Spring for an iPhone 3GS? TwitterFon Pro: Tweet Harder, Tweet Smarter Snow Leopard to Claw at Enterprise Front Doors The Sturm und Drang of iPhone Evolution New iPhone Features Are More Than AT&T Can Handle Apple Launches Speedy New iPhone, Cuts a Bunch of Prices E-Commerce Times The Multichannel E-Commerce Path Out of the Recession Jammie Thomas, RIAA Go At It Again IBM Offers Platform for Diving Into the Cloud IT Needs a New Drug TechNewsWorld Beware of the Information Security Inertia Syndrome Survey: As Web Use Climbs, Family Time Slips Playing a Hunch: Social Decision-Making Site Carves Out New Niche in Search China Scrambles to Repair Crumbling Green Dam LinuxInsider EnterpriseDB Smooths Way for Oracle App Migration Trolls and Astroturfers and Shills, Oh My! Yahoo's Hadoop to Run Free in the Wild Leeches or Users? Should Enterprise IT Have to Give Back to FOSS? CRM Buyer Administration Mulls Financial Services Industry Makeover GE Aims to Jump-Start EMR Adoption With No-Interest Loans Turning 'Interesting Moments' Into Sales: Q&A With Marketo CEO Phil Fernandez Chrysler Customers' Shrinking Service Options Sponsored Links Microsoft Office for Mac 2008 Get up to $250 off when you purchase any Mac. Save instantly! Careers in Internet Marketing SEO Strategist, Social Media Manager, E-Commerce Manager. Get started today! Think your data is safe? Register for a free assessment. Or get our ebook now. trendmicro.com/thinkagain WiFi Hotspot Locator WiFi Hotspot Locator --> City or Zip/Postal Code: Country/Region: United States Europe Canada Australia Asia South America South Pacific Middle East Inside MacNewsWorld Business Pre: iPhone Killer for a Day? Flanked by Rivals, Apple Revs Up for WWDC Apple, iPhone and the Coming Mobile Melee Computers The iTablet Cometh? MacBook Madness! Rave Reviews, Hacked Macs, 3G Thirst Apple Accelerates: New Guts, New Shells, Lower Prices? Consumer TuneUp: An iTunes Librarian, Archivist and Concierge Apple May Charge for App Double-Dipping Microsoft Goes Bing, Palm's Pwned ECT News Exclusives Keeping Credit Card Numbers Well-Cloaked: Q&A With Fingerhut's Mark Lieberg Outsource or Keep It Home? Have It Your Way: Q&A With Alpine Access CEO Chris Carrington Riding Out the Storm: Q&A With Information Builders CEO Gerry Cohen iPhone Japanese University Uses iPhones as Truant Officers Of Zune, iPhone and Pre: Sweating the Small Stuff Knives Out for the iPhone iPod Microsoft Sharpens the Picture for Zune HD Microsoft Disowns Zune Phone Teaser Tweets The Shuffle's Mad Margins, AT&T's Separation Anxiety, and Visions of an $899 iMac iTunes Store Spotify Mobile App Plays Tunes Even When the Stream Runs Dry OdioWorks Drags Apple to Court in Free Speech Battle An Xserve Lift, an iTunes Shift and a Gift Card Grift Must Read The Rise and Fall of Traditional Journalism, Part 5 It's Time to Push Back Against Twitter Backlash How Apple Made Windows 7 Better Reviews 'The Sims 3' for iPhone: How Large Can You Live on a Small Screen? AAA iPhone App Is a Handy Road-Trippin' Resource FreeShipping.org App: I Shopped, but I Soon Dropped Security Apple Update Swats Bugs Large and Small iPods, iPhones and the Enterprise Data Clampdown Spammers Bait Hooks With Fake iPhone Game Software Apple Pounds Palm, Sets Sights on Redmond Clampdown Week: iPhone vs. Pre, China vs. Web, FTC vs. Worst ISP Ever Apple Primed for iPhone Song-and-Dance Extravaganza Spotlight Features Toiling Away in 'White-Collar Sweatshops' - aka Call Centers Windows XP: The Legacy Lives On Taking a Shine to iPhone in the Enterprise ECT News Network Information Publications E-Commerce Times TechNewsWorld LinuxInsider CRM Buyer MacNewsWorld Free Newsletters E-Commerce Minute Tech News Flash ECT News Network Weekly Newsletter Newsletter Sign Up Reader Services Account Management Become an Affiliate Discussion Free Classifieds Linking Policy Network Map News Alerts RSS / Headline Feeds Search ECT News Network Locate Products and Services E-Business Info Center IT Resources Open Source Technology CRM Solutions Center --> Corporate About Careers Contact Us Business Development Permissions Reprint Information How To Advertise Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | How To Advertise Copyright 1998-2009 ECT News Network, Inc. All Rights Reserved.