March 1, 1997
Mr. David M. Hood
Director, Analyst Relations
Computer Associates International
One Computer Associates Plaza
Islandia, NY  11788-7000

Dear David:

It was a pleasure to have been invited to participate in CA's analyst roundtable evaluation of Unicenter and Jasmine this week. As you requested, this letter is Aberdeen Group's written report to CA on our assessment of Unicenter and Jasmine's direction and what needs to be done to maximize the (revenue) impact of these two products in 1997.

Peter S. Kastner
Group Vice President

Unicenter
CA looks like it has something to hide by not responding to Tivoli's (scurrilous) get-CA PR campaign. CA is being way too meek in positioning Unicenter. The facts are you have dominant market share, the largest installed base, impressive and often leading technology, and many happy customers. You should be moving into the "Ask for the #1 product by name" branding stage.

Unicenter should have a list of superlatives: most customers; most nodes; largest number of partner applications, etc.

High level messages should center around Unicenter as the premier product that will:
- Measure: system performance, network performance, software license compliance
- Secure: security policies, authentication, encryption, intrusion detection
- Adapt: to application, network, middleware, OS, and hardware events ... then execute the pre-planned response
- Manage: systems, networks, desktops, assets.

CA is way behind in getting name-brand, first-tier business applications instrumented for Unicenter management. Yes, the SAP R/3 product is important, but it is first step.

Aberdeen research shows that the application ISV has enormous clout in dictating the middleware and platform sales. If the ISV pulls through Unicenter for systems management, then the Unicenter-managed servers and clients will follow.

Aberdeen research shows network management outsourcing as a fast-rising interest by CIOs: there is no win for CIOs in network management.

We are unconvinced that Tivoli's product as now constituted will be IBM's product of three years from now. While IBM must be in the systems management area, the Tivoli product set per se may not be the vehicle.

Note that Lou Gerstner of IBM has told a public audience "not to buy from a company whose initials are Computer Associates". This tells Aberdeen that IBM plans to play hardball with you. Be prepared.

Jasmine and Jade
Aberdeen believes that the market positioning of Jasmine will have a permanent impact on the success of the product. Moreover, the OO development and particularly the OODBMS markets are immature, forcing CA to missionary sell.

A frontal attack on Universal Server RDBMSs will fail because the market will not understand the technical points CA is making, won't care when they understand, and CA won't be able to out-market IBM, Informix, and Oracle.

Aberdeen's best suggestion is to target Jasmine/Jade as "the premier Java application development environment (ADE) for professional programmers". CA gets to re-package existing code and sell at a high price. Corporate developers and VAR/ISVs are prepared to spend several thousand dollars per seat for quality development tools.

Componentware is an emerging market. The degree of third-party support for Jasmine will determine its success.

CA should also consider being a best-of-breed ICE tool for Web applications. First, have a shadow development team recreate NetHaven customer sites using Jasmine/Jade.

Overall, the current plan of launching Jasmine/Jade as yet another application development environment cum database will not achieve the expectations that CA has.

The OODBMS market is immature, forcing CA to missionary sell. A frontal attack on Universal Server RDBMSs will fail.

Where Aberdeen Can Help With Unicenter Positioning
Aberdeen Group would be pleased to further discuss a business relationship with Computer Associates for consulting and services related to Unicenter marketing including: market message development, white papers, competitive analysis, CEO/CIO speeches, partner sales training, cost-of-ownership studies, sales force training, and vertical market application identification.
