inn ttm> 1
111111 ii
Anne Zieger correspondent | azieger@hostingtech.com
Apple looks to Asian markets to break out of its
niche role in the desktop market and become
a major player in the world of datacenters.
hardware & software
oping to gain a stronger foothold in the
slumping but still muscular Asian mar­
ket, Apple Computer (www.apple.com)
has moved ahead with an effort target­
ing this region for its new Xserve server. Apple
hopes to use the Xserve, a 1U rack-mount
server running Apple's Unix-based OS X oper­
ating system, to pick up Asian customers in its
traditional core niche markets, including media
and entertainment, broadband and Internet
services, education and research, and the
biotechnology and life sciences.
Like other server markets, the Asian server
market has contracted somewhat of late, declin­
ing 7 percent in revenue during the first quarter
of 2002. The region's server market (excluding
Japan) stood at $1.3 billion for the first quarter
of this year, down from $1.4 billion the year
before, according to IDC (www.idc.com). The
region remains appealing for a company like
Apple, whose position in the overall server mar­
ket is far from established.
Apple has a good
product but needs
to build channels
and acceptance
while worldwide
market conditions
are poor at best.
PETER KASTNER | ABERDEEN
“Apple is quite committed to going after this server marketplace, and over time could be a
worthy competitor," says Tim Bajarin, president of the research firm Creative Strategies
(www.creativestrategies.com). “It is our opinion that the Asian market could be Apple’s best
place to gain initial ground.”
This early in the game, it is hard to tell how successful Apple can be in Asia, a market
where Apple does not have a significant presence. Success will certainly not be a slam-dunk.
As in the United States, Asia’s server market is controlled by the traditional server manufac­
turing giants, such as Sun Microsystems, IBM, and Dell — none of which are saddled with
Apple's niche reputation.
Winning a position among these players would be difficult for any competitor, but particular­
ly for a company long associated with proprietary islands of technology, analysts note. Despite
the fact OS X runs over Unix, companies still associate Apple with its closed, proprietary days.
“That's a problem with perception that Apple needs to address,” says Tim Deal, an analyst
with analysis firm Technology Business Research (www.tbri.com). “[People forget] this is not
a Mac-only server... It supports a variety of operating systems and platforms."
More bang tetr ttbae fouclJs
To draw attention and win converts, Apple hopes to offer more bang for the buck than
some of its rivals. Xserve is designed to offer as much if not more power — and potentially, a
good deal more storage — at a price lower than comparable server lines from the server mar­
ket's current leaders.
Basic Xserve specifications include either single or dual 1-GHz PowerPC G4 processors;
dual gigabit Ethernet interfaces; two 64-bit, 66-MHz PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect)
slots offering 533-Mbps throughput; and four storage bays allowing up to 480 GB of hot-plug
internal storage.
According to one published source, an Xserve with dual 1-GHz processors, 512 MB of
cache memory, dual gigabit Ethernet cards, and 480 GB of storage sells for about $5,600.
The Xserve competes with machines like IBM's xSeries 330, another rack-optimized 1U
server. The 330 offers either one or two 1.26-GHz Pentium III chips, a 512-MB Level 2 >
cache, up to 4 GB of memory, dual 10/100 Ethernet cards, and a maximum internal storage
size of 146.8 GB. A machine with two processors, similar cache memory, a full complement
of storage, and the Linux OS is priced about $6,000.
Early Xserve sales results would appear to give Apple reason for enthusiasm; after all, the
initial pricing and design strategy for the Xserve seems to be working, at least here in the
United States. Although Apple has not yet released sales figures for the new server, analysts
say American adoption of the Xserve appears to be fairly rapid. Most industry watchers praise
>> p. 82
HOSTINGTECH MAGAZINE 80 NOV 2002

hardware & software
the new Apple server as well designed and
appropriately priced.
“It's easy to use, and physically easy to main­
tain," Deal says. “It should appeal to both the vet­
eran I.T. manager and to new I.T. managers."
Other Xserve fans praise the new server's
storage capacity. With nearly a half a terabyte of
storage available on a fully loaded model, users
get lots of archival capacity at prices much lower
than buying independent storage units. Cheaper
storage is possible, in part, because Apple chose
to base the Xserve on ATA drive technology,
rather than the more costly SCSI technology
common to Apple products in the past
“The cost for disk storage is unprecedented,"
says Daniel Duerr, founder of Xserve channel
partner and extranet software developer Grey
Zone (www.greyzone.com). “This is one of the big
things Apple did right"
In most cases, an independent NAS
(Network-Attached Storage) device with 480
GB of storage costs nearly as much as a fully
loaded Xserve. Sony's 480 GB NAS server, for
example, has a retail price of between $4,100
and $4,400, according to one channel retailer.
Another retailer features Maxtor 480 GB models
for about $3,600. For only a little more money,
the Xserve gives a user the same amount of
1 j Apple 5s quite committed to ^oing
after this server marketplace, aim©] ©ver
time couid be a worthy competitor.^
TIM BAJARIN | CREATIVE STRATEGIES
storage, plus a whole lot more features and flexibility.
Given these advantages, adopting the new technology should be an easy decision for
customers in core Apple markets like publishing and graphic design.
“For Apple's computer-intensive imaging customers, the Xserve offers a less expensive
and [more scalable product] not available from Apple until now, with the ability to port many
Unix/Linux applications easily," notes Peter Kastner, chief research officer with the analysis
firm Aberdeen Group (www.aberdeen.com).
Looking fror acceptance
That being said, the question is whether Apple
can use an Asian launch to break out of its niche
markets into broader corporate acceptance.
"Even though Apple has made some progress
in expanding their actual market presence, they 
are still seen as more for the desktop publishing and professional graphics vertical positions
in business," Bajarin says. “So they have to overcome this bias and prove they are not only
serious about creating great servers, but also have the technical skill and staffing to support
the sales teams and after-market services."
At best, finding broader acceptance could take time, warns Aberdeen's Kastner.
“No one should expect miracles overnight," Kastner says. “Apple has a good product but needs
to build channels and acceptance, while worldwide market conditions are poor at best"
database J
Apple Computer
■o CEO ...............................Steve Jobs
■o Location .. .Cupertino, California
■o Founded...................................1977
o Employees ............................ 9,612
° 2001 Revenues S5.36 billion
■° URL......................www.apple.com
FAST CONNECTIONS
EASY, FUN TO USE
AFFORDABLE • FREE WEBSITE
SHOPPING • GAMES • NEWS
STOCKS • WEATHER • SPORTS
Call 1-818-780-0008
Sign Up On-Line
E
'ajor Credit Cards Accepted
Visit Us At: http://WWW.WEBAMERICANETWORK.COM
Join TofeyH
WAX
$9.95 Monthly
NO SET UP FEES - NO TERM CONTRACTS
NO CANCELLATION FEES
NO ADVERTISING
NO HIDDEN CHARGES
UNLIMITED INTERNET ACCESS
FREE SOFTWARE DOWNLOAD

