SOURCE_URL: http://www.macnewsworld.com/story/34607.html
MIME: text/html

Mac News: Science: The Science of This Year's WWDC E-BUSINESS | TECHNOLOGY | CLASSIFIEDS [NEW] | CRM | LINUX | MAC | ECTNEWS.COM Welcome | Sign In Science Business AAPL Financial International Legal Apple Juice Computers Enterprise Systems Desktops Notebooks Consumer Accessories Apple Retail iPhone iPod iTunes Store Security Hacks & Malware Mobile Security Security Updates Software Creative Tools Gaming Mac Apps Mobile Apps OS X Virtualization Reviews Reader Services Account Management Become an Affiliate Discussion Free Classifieds News Alerts Newsletters RSS / Headline Feeds Site Maps ECT News Network Map CRM Buyer Site Map E-Commerce Times Site Map LinuxInsider Site Map MacNewsWorld Site Map TechNewsWorld Site Map Search ECT News Network | Tech Blog June 16, 2009 01:38:41 PM MacNewsWorld > Technology > Science | Read Next Article in Science Please note that this material is copyright protected. It is illegal to display or reproduce this article without permission for any commercial purpose, including use as marketing or public relations literature. To obtain reprints of this article for authorized use, please call a sales representative at (818) 461-9700 or visit http://www.ectnews.com/about/reprints/ . The Science of This Year's WWDC Print Version E-Mail Article Reprints By Elizabeth Millard MacNewsWorld 06/18/04 1:52 PM PT IDC analyst Roger Kay told MacNewsWorld that, in general, conferences such as Apple's WWDC are crucial for revealing technology to developers. "It's a good way to focus their efforts," he said. "It shows them where to take things." Entering European Markets: A Challenging but Real Opportunity Although the U.S. has a large Internet population, 79 percent of all Web users are now outside the U.S. Online retailers have viable options for entering into international expansion mode, particularly with respect to European markets. [Download PDF: 6 pgs | 686k] The keynote has been penned, the gift store is being stocked, and Apple (Nasdaq: AAPL) is ready: In a little over a week, programmers from all over will start arriving for the company's annual Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC). The conference will run from June 28th through July 2nd at the Moscone Center in San Francisco. Although Apple has not released all of the news slated for the keynote, the company has already announced that the next version of Mac OS X, nicknamed Tiger, will be unveiled at the gathering. Other treats in store for attendees will be the announcement of winners of a developer contest and several informal events, said Ron Okamoto, Apple's vice president of worldwide developer relations, in an interview with MacNewsWorld. The WWDC will feature seven tracks and almost 200 technical sessions, including a special session called, "Apple and Scientific Computing," that will cover the ways that Apple products are driving momentum in scientific markets. Blinding You with Science Apple is promoting the scientific sessions by pointing out the advances in scientific computing that have been made recently, such as the large, complex cluster installations like Virginia Tech's system, "X." Also, the company has indicated that the debut of Xgrid will also be of interest to the scientific community. Aberdeen analyst Peter Kastner told MacNewsWorld that Xgrid has found a solid foothold at universities. He noted that, as companies begin serious contemplation of grid computing, the Xgrid will be worth watching in the marketplace. As part of the conference, Apple will also be announcing the winners of " The Apple Workgroup Cluster for Bioinformatics Award Program ." For the award, Apple sought five of America's most innovative scientific research projects that would benefit from a computational cluster. Each award recipient will receive a four-node Apple Workgroup Cluster. The winners will be announced on June 29. Okamoto said that the special focus on the scientific community is not surprising, given how Apple is expanding well into that market. "At a recent biotech conference, I noticed that most people were using PowerBooks," he said. "That's just an indication that Apple is being used in multiple disciplines. Because of that, the developers for those disciplines will be at WWDC." Developer Nirvana Okamoto noted that the Apple developer conference is unique from similar events at other companies. "The Apple engineering community is very diverse," he said. "That makes it cool." He said that one of the most enjoyable aspects of the conference is to walk down the hallways and see scores of developers just sitting with their laptops open, chatting with each other about computing topics. The diversity of those hallway denizens has been increased since the advent of OS X. "We've been doing things within the developer community that have increased the number of developers we see interested in Apple," Okamoto noted. "Especially in the scientific and technical community, there is a lot of new attention for us." Fresh Talent IDC analyst Roger Kay told MacNewsWorld that, in general, conferences such as Apple's WWDC are crucial for revealing technology to developers. "It's a good way to focus their efforts," he said. "It shows them where to take things." He added that Apple has worked especially hard to woo developers. "Apple's issue is always to keep their developers interested in the platform.". That goal has been easier with the conversion of the code base to Unix, which brought in developers that previously had never considered working with Apple. Drawing these developers, as well as monitoring the scientific community, may be a boon for Apple as high-performance computing evolves. "The scale of the industry is so much bigger than it ever has been," Kay said. "It makes sense that Apple would work to attract as many developers as they can." Social Networking Toolbox: ShareThis Next Article in Science: Cassini-Huygens Mission Status Report Talkback: Be the first to comment on this story. Print Version E-Mail Article Reprints More by Elizabeth Millard Related Stories Five Steps to Apple Enterprise Success (15-Jun-04) Apple Xserve Awards To Raise Presence in Science (12-May-04) Apple's Tom Goguen on Mac Enterprise Computing (10-May-04) Unleashing Tiger on the Enterprise (05-May-04) Apple's Ron Okamoto Previews WWDC 2004 (17-Mar-04) Related News Alerts Apple Activate Alert | Search Archives More Stories by Elizabeth Millard Ken Xie of Fortinet on Fighting Content Threats (25-Nov-04) Microsoft Files More Lawsuits over Spam (24-Sep-04) French Firms Aim To Beef Up Linux Security (24-Sep-04) [Search More...] Don't miss a story -- sign up for our FREE e-mail newsletters and view the latest headlines at a glance. Tech News Flash [ View Sample ] E-Commerce Minute [ View Sample ] ECT News Network Weekly Newsletter [ View Sample ] Shortcuts Get Business and Technology News Alerts Most Popular | Spotlight Features | Exclusives This Week on ECT News Network | Podcasts WiFi Hotspot Locator Inside MacNewsWorld Latest iPhone News Apple Pounds Palm, Sets Sights on Redmond Glad Works Makes Marketing Moves Through iPhone Apps Clampdown Week: iPhone vs. Pre, China vs. Web, FTC vs. Worst ISP Ever [More...] Free White Papers IPR and the Digital Revolution Enforcing IT Change Management Policy IBM Storage Management for SMBs: Data Protection on a Mom-and-Pop Budget Cooling Strategies for IT Wiring Closets and Small Rooms Building High Impact Business Solutions with SharePoint for your Enterprise MacNewsWorld Virgin Serves Up MP3 Buffet Safari 4 Goes to Eleven WWDC: iPhone Invigorated, Snow Leopard Spruced, AT&T Tarnished Should You Spring for an iPhone 3GS? TwitterFon Pro: Tweet Harder, Tweet Smarter Snow Leopard to Claw at Enterprise Front Doors The Sturm und Drang of iPhone Evolution New iPhone Features Are More Than AT&T Can Handle Apple Launches Speedy New iPhone, Cuts a Bunch of Prices E-Commerce Times The Multichannel E-Commerce Path Out of the Recession Jammie Thomas, RIAA Go At It Again IBM Offers Platform for Diving Into the Cloud IT Needs a New Drug TechNewsWorld Beware of the Information Security Inertia Syndrome Survey: As Web Use Climbs, Family Time Slips Playing a Hunch: Social Decision-Making Site Carves Out New Niche in Search China Scrambles to Repair Crumbling Green Dam LinuxInsider EnterpriseDB Smooths Way for Oracle App Migration Trolls and Astroturfers and Shills, Oh My! Yahoo's Hadoop to Run Free in the Wild Leeches or Users? Should Enterprise IT Have to Give Back to FOSS? CRM Buyer Administration Mulls Financial Services Industry Makeover GE Aims to Jump-Start EMR Adoption With No-Interest Loans Turning 'Interesting Moments' Into Sales: Q&A With Marketo CEO Phil Fernandez Chrysler Customers' Shrinking Service Options Sponsored Links Microsoft Office for Mac 2008 Get up to $250 off when you purchase any Mac. Save instantly! Careers in Internet Marketing SEO Strategist, Social Media Manager, E-Commerce Manager. Get started today! Think your data is safe? Register for a free assessment. Or get our ebook now. trendmicro.com/thinkagain WiFi Hotspot Locator WiFi Hotspot Locator --> City or Zip/Postal Code: Country/Region: United States Europe Canada Australia Asia South America South Pacific Middle East Inside MacNewsWorld Business Pre: iPhone Killer for a Day? Flanked by Rivals, Apple Revs Up for WWDC Apple, iPhone and the Coming Mobile Melee Computers The iTablet Cometh? MacBook Madness! Rave Reviews, Hacked Macs, 3G Thirst Apple Accelerates: New Guts, New Shells, Lower Prices? Consumer TuneUp: An iTunes Librarian, Archivist and Concierge Apple May Charge for App Double-Dipping Microsoft Goes Bing, Palm's Pwned ECT News Exclusives Keeping Credit Card Numbers Well-Cloaked: Q&A With Fingerhut's Mark Lieberg Outsource or Keep It Home? Have It Your Way: Q&A With Alpine Access CEO Chris Carrington Riding Out the Storm: Q&A With Information Builders CEO Gerry Cohen iPhone Japanese University Uses iPhones as Truant Officers Of Zune, iPhone and Pre: Sweating the Small Stuff Knives Out for the iPhone iPod Microsoft Sharpens the Picture for Zune HD Microsoft Disowns Zune Phone Teaser Tweets The Shuffle's Mad Margins, AT&T's Separation Anxiety, and Visions of an $899 iMac iTunes Store Spotify Mobile App Plays Tunes Even When the Stream Runs Dry OdioWorks Drags Apple to Court in Free Speech Battle An Xserve Lift, an iTunes Shift and a Gift Card Grift Must Read The Rise and Fall of Traditional Journalism, Part 5 It's Time to Push Back Against Twitter Backlash How Apple Made Windows 7 Better Reviews AAA iPhone App Is a Handy Road-Trippin' Resource FreeShipping.org App: I Shopped, but I Soon Dropped Chordmaster Gets Pickers Grinnin', Strummers Smilin' Security Apple Update Swats Bugs Large and Small iPods, iPhones and the Enterprise Data Clampdown Spammers Bait Hooks With Fake iPhone Game Software Apple Primed for iPhone Song-and-Dance Extravaganza Google Chrome Sprouts Linux, Mac Versions 'The Sims 3' for iPhone: How Large Can You Live on a Small Screen? Spotlight Features Toiling Away in 'White-Collar Sweatshops' - aka Call Centers Windows XP: The Legacy Lives On Taking a Shine to iPhone in the Enterprise ECT News Network Information Publications E-Commerce Times TechNewsWorld LinuxInsider CRM Buyer MacNewsWorld Free Newsletters E-Commerce Minute Tech News Flash ECT News Network Weekly Newsletter Newsletter Sign Up Reader Services Account Management Become an Affiliate Discussion Free Classifieds Linking Policy Network Map News Alerts RSS / Headline Feeds Search ECT News Network Locate Products and Services E-Business Info Center IT Resources Open Source Technology CRM Solutions Center --> Corporate About Careers Contact Us Business Development Permissions Reprint Information How To Advertise Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | How To Advertise Copyright 1998-2009 ECT News Network, Inc. All Rights Reserved.