
===== XA2000-2-2-87-launch-Boston-Globe-10.txt =====
  Stratus’ new computer line
     aimed at rival Digital
   By Ronald Rosenberg
   Globe Staff
       Stratus Computer Inc. is taking
. aim at No. 1 rival Tandem Comput­
   er, as well as Digital Equipment
   Corp., with the Introduction this
   morning of a new line of fault-toler­
   ant computers. ,            •>■
       Of Stratus’ four new models, the
   most powerful can handle 50 trans­
   actions per second, compared with
 -Tandem’s 40 transactions and
   about 15 transactions per second for
   the VAX 8650, one of Digital’s larger
  ’machines, according to Stratus. The
   new line is priced between $261,000 Stratus’ president William E. Fos­
   and $1 million.                         ter: “We have tripled the high end
       “We have tripled the high end of of our computer performance and
   our computer performance and re­ reduced the cost per transaction
   duced the cost per transaction by by half.”
   half," William E. Foster, president
   and co-founder of the Malborough- terns. Tandem achieves the same re- J
   based computer company, said last suits largely through software.              j
   week. '              '        '              Digital, which does not claim to .
       Both Stratus and Tandem are the be fault-tolerant, gains high rellabll- J
 , leading suppliers of on-line transac­ Ity of its computers by clustering [
   tion processing systems - computer them for such customers as banks >
   systems designed to provide a steady and financial-service firms.              J
   stream of Information without a          ... “Increasingly Digital is becoming ;
   computer failure.’Primary custom- more of a factor and over time we ex- i
   ers are banks, which use them to pect them to be our biggest competi- I
 : provide Information for automatic­ ' tor,” said Foster.                      ' *
   teller machines. Wall Street broker­ .. The new Stratus line, which will •
   age and financial service organiza- be available In 90 days, will also be ,
 - tions, transportation and manufac­ marketed by International Business J
   turing companies’.     ’   rn;-       ./Machines Corp , which has been j
       To achieve such fault-tolerance. .selling Xurrent Stratus machines. <•
   Stratus relies on redundant; hard­ ;_IBM sales accounted for 14.5.percent
   ware, such as two central-process- ‘.nf.Stratus’ $124 million in revenues
   ing units, dual memory arid discsys- “last year.’              v
                                                                 e-
