EXECUTIVE VIEWPOINT
Charles T. Casale, C.F.A.
EVP 2
January 4, 1983

Executive Viewpoint examines fast changing computer industry trends and conditions from the dual vantagepoint of many years of industrial executive experience and institutional research analysis. The viewpoint is qualitative and seeks to identify major trends of significance to institutional investors.

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM THE TANDEM AND DATAPOINT BILLINGS AND BOOKINGS BLUNDERS? OR, DID WALL STREET MAKE THEM DO IT?

While it is easy, if not indeed popular for investors to criticize management, particularly in well publicized cases where accounting rules have been stretched or broken, few have asked why management teams do so. Further, we believe that there is sufficient understanding among investors of the operational dynamics of fast track companies (which we highlighted in EVP 1). In this edition of Executive Viewpoint we raise some questions about the quarterly treadmill companies and investors find themselves on - as exemplified by hypergrowth companies.

In EVP 2 we paint the second background picture of what led up to several well publicized earnings disappointments, leaving more detailed analysis for editions 3 and 4.

THE QUARTERLY EARNINGS TREADMILL

Breathes there a portfolio manager or securities analyst who is unaware of the quarterly portfolio measurement game? Yet many do not fully appreciate that management teams are on the same treadmill, placed there in large part by analysts and portfolio managers who rely heavily on quarterly corporate earnings performance to make their own quarterly goals.

The treadmill has become circular:
o Pension sponsors and other portfolio owners have become accustomed to ranking their outside managers quarterly. A few quarters in the bottom quartiles spells dismissal, hence the valiant attempts to outperform other managers in every kind of market environment.
o Money managers in turn look for superior insights in very near term corporate earnings progress - to better perform and to satisfy their corporate clients.
o Corporate clients, in turn, put the best face on their business prospects lest their stocks be dropped from portfolios with a large and lasting thud. As with dismissed money managers, crashed stocks tend to linger in the penalty box for several quarters.

FULL CIRCLE

Is it any wonder then, that corporations strive for accelerated or at least growing - or at worst- smoothed earnings? Under the best of circumstances the challenge is a worthy one, but as P/E multiples soar, so do investor expectations! And when expectations crash, so does portfolio performance.

So, there we have it, the gut issue that won't go away, the quarterly earnings treadmill that industry and investors find themselves on: corporate sponsors demand superior near term performance from their money managers who in turn demand superior near term performance from corporate earnings.

Is it any wonder, then, that hypergrowth companies occasionally come a cropper?

LIFE IN THE FAST LANE - OR MORE ADVENTURES OF MBA AND CFO AT FTI

We'll continue to personify hypergrowth companies as Fast Track Incorporated (FTI), managed by Mighty Big Achiever (MBA) who tries to keep reign over design genius Brilliant Young Engineer (BYE). Now at the $1/4 - 1/2 billion sales level, FTI has hired away from Megamonolithic (a Fortune 500 winner) Cut Frilly Overhead (CFO).

Hypergrowth tends to generate hyper price/earnings ratios, which is terrific on the way up. But as we have seen, (EVP 1), hypergrowth inevitably hiccups. Further, analysts being a conservative lot, they worry an awful lot about when the glitch will come, or when the growth will slow down, or when IBM or some other colossus will eat FTI's lunch.

So there develops an intensive ritualistic questioning of MBA and CFO and even BYE (when analysts can find him out of the lab), and any and all other FTI executives so they can be the first in the know. FTI has yet to have a major earnings glitch, but since they are inevitable, the quest is on, with the investment winner not only being able to sell out at the top, but making a ton of money on the way down.

So another, faster, and less stable circular treadmill develops:
o In the quest for superior investment performance, Confident Fortyish Analyst (CFA) asks MBA and CFO increasingly detailed and ponderous questions.
o CFO tells his staff to be aware of the fine grain analysis that investors want, and to build some cushion into operating methods so as to immunize the earnings from the actual vagaries of the real business.
o CFO is so successful in doing this, and MBA is so successful in managing the business, that CFA and his associates now take for granted the smoothness of earnings progress.
o During all this, FTI has lost a week of shipments from an earthquake in Silicon Valley (or from a snow storm in the East or a tornado in the Midwest), and kept right on track. But, MBA and all of FTI heroically made the quarter to maintain the earnings progression. During the interim, CFA fretted, reworked his numbers, and shaved his estimate a nickel for the year. But the earnings came through intact!
o Now, not only is FTI recession proof, but earthquake/snowstorm/tornado proof as well, raising the multiple a notch or two. Heady stuff for MBA, CFO and all the troops at FTI who are now checking stock prices by the hour and writing covered calls.
o Even more Wall Street sponsors step forward, but coming in after the big rise, feel they need to say something more than CFA who discovered the stock quite early. Up go the estimates!
o CFO, always a worrier, tells MBA that it's time to cool off the street, since the latest round of estimates is simply not doable.

Well, we won't finish the details of this sad tale since we all know the end of it. The tightly stretched rubber band at FTI finally snaps, the stock crashes, CFA blames management for lack of control, management seethes over unrealistic street expectations, and FTI exits the most active list for some peace and quiet in the day-to-day battles of its industry and looks forward to another day in the sun.

GETTING OFF THE SECOND TREADMILL

There are only a few ways for FTI to get off the second treadmill. One, paradoxically, is to run even faster, since it is better to snap a large rubber band than a small one - it doesn't hurt that much more but the financial rewards can be so much larger. Alternatively, FTI can settle back into the moderate speed lane, keeping pace with industry growth.

So much for prelude. In the next two editions of EVP we analyze the operating cycle of hypergrowth firms - specifically the backlog, bookings, and billings issue - and financial statement distortions caused by the operating cycle.

Copyright 1983, Charles T. Casale, Wayland, Ma.
