=== PHI-in-Riding-the-Runaway-Horse-re-Wang-6.txt ===
﻿Aho by Charles Kenney
D u K a k I s: An American Odyssey
(with Robert L. Turner)
Riding
„u THE
R.U N A WA Y
Horse
The Rise and Decline
of Wang Laboratories
Charles C. Kenney

Little, Brown and Company
Boston Toronto London
FOUR
“I Have to Do This to
Save My Company”
THE COMPUTER PIONEERS of the 1940s and ’50s concen­
trated the bulk of their efforts on hardware, on the steel and wires
that comprised the body of a computer. But by the 1960s, there
was a crying need for people who could create software, the set of instruc­
tions that tell a computer what tasks to perform. If hardware is a com­
puter’s body, software is its mind.
Software is now a huge worldwide industry, but in the early 1960s,
when there were few people who understood computers well enough to
write programs for them, the software business was in its infancy. Pre­
dictably, some of the software pioneers were nurtured in the Cambridge
of MIT and Harvard.
And of all the small companies spawned in that area during an explo­
sion of scientific creativity, Philip Hankins, Inc., was one of the best. The
company took its name from its founder, a bright young man whose
passion for computers drove him to work seven days a week. PHI, as it
was known, was located in Arlington, Massachusetts, near Cambridge,
and it attracted some very gifted young people. It began operating in
1958 and within only a few years had gained a reputation within the elite
computer world as a first-rate operation.
PHI’s client list was a Who’s Who of technology companies and gov­
ernment installations, from the consulting firm Arthur D. Little to NASA
and IBM. PHI engineers, in fact, bailed IBM out of what might have
been a humiliating moment. Just a few days before IBM was to unveil a
new computer, IBM officials discovered that their new machine wasn’t 
working properly. IBM brought the machine to PHI’s ramshackle offices,
and a band of rumpled young PHI specialists worked nonstop for four
days until they got it working.
There was a pioneering sense at PHI, a “terribly exciting” atmosphere,
recalls Bob Plachta, a PHI vice-president, a sense that they were operating
on a new scientific and commercial frontier. Computers were massive,
powerful beasts at the time, and the PHI people showed they could tame
those beasts, that they could create programs to make the machines do
whatever people wanted them to do. The company started in an old
house, absorbed the house next door, annexed a garage, and finally spilled
over into an old funeral home. Hankins expanded his business by leasing
a powerful new IBM 360, the pioneering line of mainframe computers
that would set the industry standard. He turned an old hearse bam out
back into a computer center, and PHI rented time on the machine to a
variety of different businesses who needed the use of a computer, but
couldn’t afford to lease or buy a machine of their own. It was the right
move at the right time for PHI. So great was demand for time on PHI’s
machine that the center had to be kept open twenty-four hours a day.
But PHI’s business truly took off when the company’s designers cre­
ated software that enabled a computer to do the entire payroll for the
Marine Midland Bank in New York. In retrospect, it was as simple and
basic as a software package could be, but at the time it was an exciting
breakthrough with virtually unlimited commercial application. In the
1960s, the tedium of producing a payroll every week or two was a burden
for every company and government agency in the world. Anyone who
could computerize the task would make a fortune.
Many of the PHI people, more oriented to science than commerce,
didn’t see the commercial potential. But a young PHI salesman, John
Cullinane, saw it clearly. Cullinane later left PHI and founded his own
software outfit, Cullinet, which was, at one time, the most successful
company of its kind in the world.
PHI sold enough payroll packages to grow into one of the largest
software companies in the area. “PHI was probably the most fantastic
business atmosphere I had ever seen,” recalls Bob Plachta. “It was almost
like magic. I remember we were at our Christmas party one year, and a
young man just wandered into our party. He was a Harvard Business
School grad and he wound up talking to me and Phil, and he said, ‘What
are your company’s problems?’ And we looked at each other for a
moment and shrugged and said, ‘Well, we don’t really have any
problems.’”
•JU RIDING THE RUNAWAY HORSE
The extent of his experience with computers had been sitting in on a
graduate-school lecture about the machines. But computers intrigued
him and he applied for the job. In September 1968, at the age of twenty­
seven, Koplow joined Wang.
His lack of formal computer background gave him an odd approach
to the business. “Harold is a very disarming guy,” says Ed Lesnick, who
had long favored the company’s moving forcefully into the word process­
ing market. “He’s not into computerese at all. In describing the electrical
current within a system he would stand up at the blackboard, in front of
a diagram, and talk about ‘these guys coming down this path, and then
these guys go up this and turn that on.’”
There was an irreverent side to Koplow as well. After only a month
on the job he completed all the assignments he had been given and went
in and told Doctor Wang he was bored, asking impatiently: “You got
anything else for me to do around here?”
Koplow found that his office was uncomfortably warm in summer. To
remedy that, he took a hacksaw one day and diverted some of the flow in
the air-conditioning system that fed into the Doctor’s office.
That Koplow was irreverent or sometimes difficult mattered not the
least bit to An Wang, for Wang saw that this man was gifted. Koplow
was so crucial to the success of the company that Lesnick says Wang Labs
would have gone nowhere without him.
But Koplow’s days as die Doctor’s pet seemed rather distant when he
was assigned to long-range planning. He arrived there to find that his
friend Dave Moros had been exiled as well.
But, for Moros and Koplow, winding up together was some consola­
tion, because the two men had great mutual respect. Koplow described
Moros as bright and perceptive, but something of an absentminded pro­
fessor. “He can forget where the hell he is,” Koplow says of Moros.
Moros can, in fact, appear remote. He looks at first, in his rumpled
corduroys, like an academic specializing in Middle English. He is of
medium height, somewhat stocky, with powerful shoulders. His dark
hair, swarthy complexion, and dramatic good looks lend him the air of a
patrician prizefighter. While Koplow could be loud and aggressive,
Moros was reserved, a reflective reader of Socrates, something of an
aesthete.
Moros’s father had fought with the White Army in Russia against the
Bolsheviks in the 1917 Revolution and was forced to flee the country after
the Communist triumph. He escaped to Tel Aviv, where Dave was born
“like selling sex on the beach”
in 1936, two years before the family settled in the United States. After
studying math at Tufts, where he was in the Reserve Officer rain’n®
Corps, Moros went on active duty as a computer specialist, an wor e
for a time on a UNIVAC. Moros earned his master’s degree in business
administration from American University and, in 1964, joined Philip Han
kins, Inc., where he worked on the Apollo and Gemini space projects.
Moros had not been happy with the Wang-PHI merger. Although he
had immense respect for Wang’s professional ability, Moros was not en­
amored of what he considered the paternalistic atmosphere at the com­
pany. “The place always ran like a Chinese family,” says Moros. He was
the father. He knew best. You did what you were told. I didn t like that
at all.”
Moros was sent to long-range planning, he joked, “for having dis­
turbed the peace of the Middle Kingdom” — in this case, that meant
having gotten caught in the crossfire of company in-fighting.
And so Koplow and Moros, two men who grew to be, in John Cun­
ningham’s words, “like a long-married couple,” were thrown together,
castoffs within the company.
An Wang dispatched Koplow and Moros with the instruction that
they try to do something with the company’s word processing mess. So
in a very relaxed, unpressured, and who-cares kind of way,” says Moros,
“we worked on word processing.”
They began with a series of unhurried trips to see what the state-of-
the-art word processing machines could do. In their travels, they were
guided by Ed Lesnick, who had a longstanding interest in word process­
ing. As early as 1969, Lesnick, in fact, had gone so far as to write speci­
fications for a word processing machine. Lesnick monitored technological
developments at other firms and, in 1975, he led Koplow and Moros on
an inspection tour to companies, some of them tiny start-ups, in Wash­
ington, D.C., California, and Canada. Each new machine had at least one
strong feature, and most had major weaknesses. The Wang team wanted
to build a machine without any of the weaknesses, but with all of the best
features they’d seen on other machines.
When they returned from their scouting trips these men were more
convinced than ever that Wang could break new ground. I was sure we
could do better,” says Koplow.
Moros is a relaxed man who loves the intellectual side of science, but who
is not in the least like die hackers who work nonstop for three or four offering of die B stock, several company officials had gathered together
to prepare for an important meeting in New York with analysts at
Moody’s Investors Service. Cunningham was involved in the preparation
session but he was not scheduled to go to New York. He worked sales
and marketing, not finance. But as they prepared, it became clear to
Cunningham that he would be able to help at the presentation, diat per­
haps he could fill a void left by Jones’s departure.
He said to Harry Chou, who was leading the Wang team to New
York: “Why don’t I put together five or six flip charts explaining our
technical and company strategy and our distribution strategy, and go widi
you?” Chou diought it was a good idea. Cunningham went along and his
presentation was a hit. He appeared relaxed standing in front of a room
full of financial analysts. He was a natural politician who could work a
room with case. Cunningham made sure he was always available to Wall
Street financial people looking for an understanding of the company, and
he quickly gained credibility among analysts, many of whom developed
a personal liking for him as well as professional respect.
It was a perfect match for the Doctor, who hated going down to Wall
Street. He neither liked nor trusted die financial community, and feared
diey would try to get dieir hands on part of his company. He saw diem
as a threat to his control of Wang Laboratories.
It was very unusual for a small and growing company’s CEO not to
attend such Wall Street meetings, but Doctor Wang hated them so much
that he happily accepted Cunningham’s offer to stand in for him.
Cunningham even managed to turn die Doctor’s absence to an advan­
tage. Invariably, analysts would ask who die CEO was and where he was.
Cunningham would fill them in on the Doctor’s background, mentioning
his work on core memory at the Harvard Computation Lab. And he
would say that Doctor Wang was unable to be present because “he’s in
the back room with a soldering iron inventing the next new product.” To
the analysts, the image of a mysterious Chinese genius in the lab was
irresistible.
In 1976, the Doctor put Cunningham in charge of all the company’s
external communications — advertising, public relations, dealings with
financial analysts.
Perhaps the best measure of how trusting and close a relationship existed
between Cunningham and Doctor Wang was Mrs. Wang’s reference to
Cunningham as “our American son.”
Though Fred Wang never considered Cunningham his American uiuuicr — rar rrom it — even he reserved high plane iui i 11 a
ability: “John was terrific at growing die sales force at a time wi cn
couldn’t get die best people. The company was small and die top co ege
graduates chose IBM. John created an organization that was very g
for what it needed to do. He had the personality, that glib style of
He captured customers, the press, and analysts. He was into sound bites
before dicy were popular. He’s a very intelligent guy.”
And he worked his way up in the company in an intelligent manner.
Both of Cunningham’s older brothers, Bill and Paul, had worked at
Burroughs, the big computer company, and his brother-in-law was at
Honeywell. John constantly quizzed them about the business until he felt
he had a fairly keen understanding of Burroughs, a company for which
he had never worked a day in his life. And he took the lessons of Bur­
roughs and applied the best of what he had learned to Wang Labs.
If there was a crucial asset that allowed Cunningham to climb the lad­
der at Wang, it was range. He understood and was comfortable not only
with sales, but also with marketing, finance, distribution, and even
research and development. He could glad-hand with the sales guys, peer
into die future with the marketing people, speak the language of the
techies, and talk the intricacies of the financial world on Wall Street.
“He can charm a venture capital audience; he’s terrific with people on
the Street,” says David Fine, a former IBM vice-president who later
worked as a consultant in the computer industry and got to know
Cunningham while he consulted to Wang Labs. “John understood like
few guys in sales the technical side, pricing, and economics. He under­
stands the total business. He’s one of the smartest guys I’ve met.”
“You won’t find anybody who is as bright and as good with people,”
says Bill Dixon. “You’ll find people who are brighter and you’ll find peo­
ple who are better with people, but you’ll never find people with both.
In the fall of 1981, Cunningham was offered the job of president of Prime
Computer, a fast-growing Massachusetts-based maker of minicomputers.
It was a very big deal, indeed, for a thirty-eight-year-old man to have a
chance to take over such a dynamic company. But Cunningham was so
confident of his relationship with Doctor Wang and believed so strongly
in his future at Wang Labs that he turned the job down. The Prime board
wanted him badly enough that they approached him again with a sweet­
ened offer. But, again, he turned it down. His future was at Wang
Laboratories.
“I was in a good position with Wang,” says Cunningham. I liked the
U> ’puuay juaviu disagrees, oir, icis go wicn vvaug. nuuuuy
ma cs a better small computer or word processor. They’re giant-killers!”
And as die rock from David’s hand causes the entire boardroom to
stake and knocks paintings off die wall, a voice-over says: “It happened
crore. It can happen again. Because nobody’s hungrier than Wang.”
It was a ficsty, attention-grabbing spot diat industry people found tit­
illating for its direct assault on IBM. Hill Holliday wanted to air the
commercial during the 1978 Super Bowl, but it was far too expensive.
Instead, Connors bought tiiirty seconds on die Super Bowl pregame
show for $150,000 — $5,000 per second. The people at Hill Holliday also
pushed dieir contacts at CBS to air the commercial as close to game time
as possible. On Super Bowl Sunday, die Wang brass sat back to watch,
and they could hardly believe what they saw. The commercial didn’t just
run close to the beginning of die game; it was die very last spot during
die pregame show! It was like getting the first commercial during the
game and vastly better than having it run later in the game, when die
audience had dwindled. A mammoth audience — tens of millions of peo­
ple was watching when die Wang commercial aired. And the effect was
dramatic.
“Everybody in the fucking world saw that spot,” recalls Cunningham.
The Wang sales force was ecstatic, and customers were impressed. The
spot ran periodically in the following months, and research showed it had
been an overwhelming success. Unaided-awareness of Wang increased
from 3 percent to 14 percent. Aided-awareness jumped from 10 percent to
an impressive 35 percent. The Wang people had only one fear — that
other computer companies would quickly catch on to how effective tele­
vision advertising was for them. In fact, Ken Fisher, then CEO at Prime
Computer, would run into Cunningham from time to time and ask how
die TV advertising was working. Cunningham would innocendy reply
that it really hadn’t worked and was a mistake. In truth, of course, it was
working beautifully.
That TV advertising put Wang on the map,” says Cunningham. “It
was a nothing company everybody thought was a big deal.”
The advertising was timed perfecdy to open doors for the salespeople.
And once a Wang salesperson was face-to-face with a prospective cus­
tomer, the rest was easy, for the truth was that Wang Labs was offering
some of the finest computer products in the world, products so good that
one industry analyst heard numerous IBM customers telling Big Blue,
wncn it was about to come out with a new product, lu
These superb products triggered a period of growth so specta
in July 1979 analyst John Adams observed, “Wang’s grow ^eve it
fastest of any major [company] in the business. Moreover, we
will continue so for the next 12 months at least. Our conn cnce
By die late 1970s, minicomputers were taking a sizable bite: out o
mainframe business. Companies and government offices foun at minI
efficiently performed many of die functions previously reserve or main
frames at far less cost. “Minicomputer” was a misleading description.
image it conjured up was of a small, even tiny, machine, a mee 1 e o'
with modest ability. In truth, though they were small compare to  	
massive mainframes, minicomputers could be as large as a re igerator
and they were surprisingly powerful. .
Doctor Wang and John Cunningham were eager to enter m
computer sweepstakes, where profit margins were fat and w ere e ma
ket was easily large enough to accommodate Wang, along w 1 ig
Equipment Corporation, which dominated the mini market, an
small but hard-charging contenders such as Data Gcner an rJme'
A Wang Labs development group headed by Robert A Siegel, a r -
liant, abrasive young designer with shaggy hair, a mustac e, an 8 ass ’
had been working to build a minicomputer since the ear y 1970s-
was very much like Harold Koplow a creative genius wi a g g
tuan ego. He was a wunderkind who joined PHI as a programmer w
he was barely twenty-two. In his rumpled corduroys, iege 00 e
man who had lost count of how many Grateful ea conce
gone to. At Wang, he was known to be brillian y creative, u
also an absolutist with little willingness to compromise, lege
was that he was right and anyone who disagree wi imwa
wrong but probably stupid as well. A native New or er wi
dinary competitive instinct, he had little respect for opinions that clashed
with his. He was an intense and deadly serious young man.
He had made enough progress on the new Wang mini that some co
the sky, die tower was an enormous, hulking thing that was about as well-
suited to its surroundings as a geodesic dome would be in Manhattan. It
was gray cement, and functional. The only grudging bit of color appeared
at die top of die tower in a bright blue Wang logo.
Just two years later, die company opened tower two and almost imme­
diately filled it with workers. Tower two appeared to be an exact replica
of tower one although it was 25 percent larger. And it was crowned with
a penthouse for the Doctor and a handful of top executives. These were
not simple utilitarian spaces, but huge, beautifully furnished offices, every
one with a superb view.
“The penthouse was a big deal,” says Cunningham, “because if you
were there, you were important. They were better facilities, beautiful
views, great sunsets.”
Naturally, die Doctor had the finest office, eighteen hundred square
feet of sprawling space in which Wang was completely dwarfed.
Architecturally, the towers gave off a somber air when all-out celebra­
tion would have been more appropriate, for Wang Labs was nothing less
than the savior of this soulful old mill city. By the time Wang was done
expanding, it would go from occupying 350,000 square feet of space in
Lowell to nearly two and a half million square feet. And, in the process,
it would play the lead role in cutting die city’s unemployment rate to a
mere 3 percent.
As die 1970s drew to a close, it was clear that stories like Wang’s resus­
citation of Lowell were emblematic of something taking place throughout
Massachusetts. In February 1979, an article in the Boston Globe read:
Bom and bred in Massachusetts, the computer industry has become a
giant of this state’s economy and is growing like die proverbial bean­
stalk. From the seeds of a science fertilized in Cambridge laboratories,
the industry has grown in a quarter century from a fledgling whose
functions were as incomprehensible as its jargon to a key medium for
the United States in world competition. Likewise, the industry is now
at the epicenter of Massachusetts’ vitality in the national marketplace.
The pace of the computer age has been characterized by startling
technological advances and markedly decreasing unit costs. The work
of a machine that 20 years ago filled a room and cost several million
dollars is now done by a chip the size of a matchhead that sells for 30
cents. It has stimulated the productivity of an area that not so long ago
seemed cornered by increasing energy costs, depleted natural resources
and a declining labor pool....
In 1976 Wang Labs wasn’t even in the top 50 of Datamation's list ol
the country’s major computer companies. By 1979, it was number 25. Just
two years later, it had leaped up to number 11.
Leading all the growth indicators was the company’s stock. Its increase
dirough the years testified dramatically to the company’s spectacular suc­
cess. From 1976 to 1983, the effective price of Wang Laboratories stock
climbed from $6.75 per share to more than $800 per share. An investment
of slightly less than $8,000 in 1976 would have appreciated in 1983 to Si
million.
The Wang sales force that helped drive the company to such great heights
had a gypsylike character. These were men and women who were not cut
out of the prim-and-proper corporate mold. They were a colorful group,
many with less than stellar resumes. The legend around the company was
that Cunningham had taken a group of former Venetian blind salesmen
and turned them into a formidable high-tech sales force. The Wang peo­
ple were misfits, distinctly different from the well-trained, white-shirted,
stiff-collared IBM crew. Exuberant Wang staffers in the company’s sup­
port group, comprised mosdy of women, printed T-shirts with the mes­
sage: “If you have a Wang you need support.” Not to be outdone, the
service group printed T-shirts reading: “My Wang is always up.”
They were their own brand of entrepreneurs, hard chargers who
worked until the point of exhaustion and who then played, often with an
Animal House mentality, as hard as they worked. During one meeting in
Phoenix, a group of salespeople sat around listening to a manager drone
on. A salesman grew bored. He raised his hand, and asked for permission
to pull up his socks. Of course, the annoyed manager replied. The sales­
man smiled, stood up, dropped his pants, and pulled up his socks as his
colleagues roared their approval.
Cunningham recruited the most aggressive, hungriest salespeople he
could find, loaded them down with sizzling products, and shoved them
out the door. They were unstoppable. As a reward, he paid them better
than any other computer company in the country. While IBM paid its
salespeople commissions under 2 percent, Wang salespeople got 5 percent
on sales (up to a limit). It was far easier for Wang salespeople to reach an
annual income of $150,000 than for salespeople at any other company in
the industry. Earning much more than that was difficult because of ceil­
ings Wang imposed. Nonetheless, some salespeople made $200,000 and
$250,000 in a year.
When word got around the industry of the money that could be made
ii iLiiiuiL lenuenty to believe that everything that was right and
good was his doing, and nobody else deserves any credit. He’s glorified
himself at the expense of people who really did the work.”
Peter Brooke was angry about the way in which Wang dismissed a
deal from the 1950s in which Brooke had been instrumental. In its early
days, when Wang Labs had been strapped for cash and searching for a
financial partner, Brooke had found Warner & Swasey, a Cleveland
machine tool company, and worked out an arrangement for Warner &
Swasey to buy a 25 percent interest in Wang Labs.
“Wang had a selective view of history,” says Brooke. “Jim Hodge and
Myron Curtis, the director of research at Warner & Swasey, convinced
Wang to manufacture his own products. In the pivotal years of the early
’60s, the Warner & Swasey guys had an important influence. Warner &
Swasey gave him an equity base to expand and gave him guidance.”
But in the book, Wang trashed the Warner & Swasey deal.
Frank Trantanella, an engineer who worked at the company in the
early days, was also angered by the book. “My own view of him changed
after reading the book,” says Trantanella. “It was sad. The book shreds
facts to create a fairy tale to suit his own purposes.” Trantanella says a
particularly egregious omission is the significant role played in the com­
pany during the 1960s by Wang’s old friend from China, Dr. Ge Yao Chu.
Chu had worked extremely hard during the early years, says Trantanella,
and he produced much of the fine work done by the company back then.
Chu was a major player at the company and the book, says Trantanella,
does not convey that. Indeed, Chu is mentioned only once.
Another serious slight by Wang involved the case of PHI, the software
company Wang Laboratories acquired in 1968. Within a year after the
purchase of PHI, the Doctor writes in Lessons, “a large number” of the
people “whose expertise was PHI’s principle asset — had left the com­
pany. ... The defections were irritating at the time, and it taught me the
lesson that if you enter into a relationship with a company whose prin­
cipal asset is people, you should do so in a way that does not remove all
incentives for those people to continue working.”
PHI founder Phil Hankins says it is his recollection that only one of
the major players at PHI left after about a year, and Hankins himself left
after about a year and a half. But the crucial point that Doctor Wang does
not acknowledge was that, in taking over PHI, Wang Labs embraced
three engineers whose products earned many billions of dollars for Wang.
No less a group than David Moros, Bob Siegel, and Bob Kolk came to
Wang through PHI. Not only is it contrary to the historical record to discount the VH1 deal, there arc those who believe that without uic uiun>
power that PHI brought to the company, Wang Laboratories might
never have been anything more than a small maker of scientific
calculators.
If Lessons disclosed little about the Doctor’s emotions, about the inner
workings of the man, one thing it did reveal was Wang’s expectation that
his sons would follow him into the business. It was the first time he had
ever made that declaration publicly.
“I want my children to have the opportunity to demonstrate their skills
at management,” Wang wrote. “In fact, I consider it their obligation —
rather than their privilege — to do so.”
This attitude contrasted sharply with the practice of fellow Lincoln
resident Kenneth Olsen, president of Digital Equipment Corporation. In
The Ultimate Entrepreneur, their book about Olsen and Digital, Glenn
Rifkin and George Harrar write that Olsen “came to believe strongly that
nepotism was as bad in business as in politics.... Digital was his, not
die family’s, business.”
Olsen’s brother Stan worked at the company for a number of years,
but after Stan took a year’s leave of absence, his brother did not urge him
to return to work. And
no other family members, be it his youngest brother David, his sons
Glenn and James, or his daughter Ava, were invited to join the business.
He was adamant that, as a public company, DEC owed its allegiance
to the stockholders and not members of the Olsen clan. Unlike corpo­
rate neighbor An Wang, who groomed his son Fred to take over Wang
Laboratories, . . . Ken has no interest in passing along his legacy to an
Olsen.
Though Fred says he “never did anything just to please Dad,” a senior
company executive close to both Fred and his father says that “Fred was
following his father’s plan. Fred was obediently following his father’s plan,
sublimating, to a certain degree, himself as part of this very, very strong-
willed great man.”
Life in the Cunningham period suited the Doctor well. During those
years An Wang had been able to remove himself from the day-to-day
affairs of the company, to leave most operational matters to his president,
freeing himself to dabble in whatever R&D, financial, philanthropic,
political, or educational projects caught his eye. But with Cunningham’s 
pany officials believed die machine should have been announced much
earlier. But Siegel would not allow it out die door until it was perfect,
strange as diat was in an industry where incomplete products are com­
monly announced. However, no one within the company wanted to trifle
with Siegel. The talk around Wang was that once, when Siegel was pas­
sionately making a point during a meeting, Doctor Wang and Fred Wang
entered die room — and he ordered them out.
The computer that Siegel’s team produced was called the Wang VS. It
had many of the characteristics of a mainframe computer because it was
essentially modeled after die popular IBM 360.
“The VS was very easy to operate,” says John Cunningham. “There
were a lot of minis for scientific and engineering purposes from DEC,
HP, and Data General. The Wang VS was one of the first minis for com­
mercial application.”
The toughest test of the VS was competition from the now legendary
VAX computer, which was announced by Digital only weeks after the
debut of the VS in October 1977. In sales, the VS more than held its own
against the VAX, and for business needs, die VS proved vastly superior
to the VAX.
When the VS fully hit the marketplace in 1979, it gave Wang its third
hot product. The 2200 small-business computer continued selling well, and
the Wang Word Processing System had become an industry phenome­
non. Most high-tech companies would have been more than delighted
with a single product as popular as any one of Wang’s three top sellers.
Collectively through the years, the 2200, the VS, and the word processing
system would yield billions of dollars of revenues for Wang Laboratories.
These three remarkable products were attributable to four men. Thou­
sands of Wang employees contributed to the cause, of course, but the
success of these three offerings could be traced back to the three technol­
ogy team leaders who, along with Doctor Wang, had developed the prod­
ucts. Bob Siegel guided the VS team. Koplow led the word processing
group. And Bob Kolk guided the 2200 development.
Kolk was very different from Siegel and Koplow. He was older by a
half-dozen years, and he more readily listened to others’ views. He had
graduated from MIT in 1958 and had gone to work for North American
Aviation, the company that would later become Rockwell International.
He earned a master’s degree in engineering from the University of South­
ern California and joined PHI in 1966 when it was the hottest software
house around. While Siegel shunned social activities at PHI, however, Kolk participated enthusiastically in company softball games and beer
parties.
At Wang, Kolk gained a reputation as smart and reliable. Though e
wasn’t considered as flashy an intellect as either Koplow or Siegel, he was
respected for his steadiness. Kolk was particularly popular among the
salespeople, who appreciated his willingness to listen to what customers
wanted in products. Kolk, in fact, was quite skillful in his dealings wit
customers, far smoother than most R&D people.
Other titan their success, the three men held in common only one
thing: a mutual enmity. At times, hostilities even broke into the open.
But dtat problem was solved by the fourth man to whom the compa­
ny’s technological success could be attributed — An Wang.
During the early glory years, from about 1977 through 1981, An Wang
was as untraditional a CEO as there was at an American company, or
he was not only CEO but he was also chief of development the man
who presided, day-to-day, over the R&D operation. Throughout e
company’s most successful years, An Wang was intimately involve in e
running of his company, but he paid vastly more attention to R ur
ing the early part of that period than he did during the later part. Jo
Cunningham estimates that before 1981, Wang spent fully 65 percent|
his time working on development projects. This is one of e reasons 1
products were so good. He didn’t merely assign a product eve °P^nc*
task to a team and forget about it for six months, he wor e wi e
team day in and day out. He moved from one development meeting
to the next, listening to plans and ideas, tossing out comments ere
and there. He spent endless hours in meetings with aro op o ,
working on refinements to the word processing system, e wor e
Bob Kolk to develop a personal computer; and e a re e
sively with Bob Siegel on the original VS and its su sequent g
tions. . ,.
Up until about 1981, when the company rose from its extraordinary
success to become some sort of phenomenon, the Doctor spent a ou
percent of his time on corporate matters such as the companys n ,
the marketing and sales plan, and so on. Only about 15 percent °
time went to various functions with employees an customers.
lunches, dinners, and cocktail parties were not the Doctor s strength,
he did his best to avoid them. But when his sales managers from through­
out the world or the country gathered in Boston or Lowe , e e t co
pelled to show up. With regular meetings of manufacturing managers,
