

                                                            December 5, 2001

                 Caveat Emptor:  HP’s Consumer IT Leadership
                        Needs New Focus on Consumers

   Hewlett-Packard’s avowed strategy is to lead the market in consumer IT,
     including access PCs, imaging products, and new consumer electronic
        products yet to be announced.  However, Aberdeen’s recent lab
      experience with HP’s digital camera demonstrates that HP consumer
   product support is less than “world class.”  This Aberdeen Lab Journal
      highlights HP's problems based on real-life experience with HP’s
     product, documentation, Web site, and customer support.  Aberdeen’s
         primary findings indicate that, unless HP makes some needed
     improvements quickly, dissatisfied consumers will go elsewhere for
   their high-tech appliances, guaranteeing that HP will lose the race for
   dominance over consumer mind and market share — simultaneously costing
      millions of dollars in product support expenses.  No doubt smart
     consumers would do well to learn from our mistakes in dealing with
                products that use relatively new Windows XP.

                                      .

What Consumers Want
Is Easy to Explain

Simply stated, consumers want complex electronics and Information
Technology (IT) to be simple and intuitive, so that both the out-of-the-
box, initial experience and repeat usage make sense and become second
nature.  These consumer requirements are well studied and result in
considerable engineering in order to achieve just the right consumer
satisfaction level.  In today’s Internet world, consumers expect quick-
start instructions, searchable Web sites, and published answers to
frequently asked questions (FAQs).

In the Lab:  HP’s C315 Digital Camera

As an analyst attending HP’s annual conference back in spring of 2001, I

received a gift of a C315 digital camera.
As an amateur photographer who lacked prior experience with digital
cameras, I looked forward to experimenting with HP’s product.  And, indeed,
once I got the camera installed and running, I enjoyed using the camera for
about six months.
Photographs taken with the C315 were consistently of high quality, the
transfer process to my PC has been straightforward, and HP’s worthwhile —
but hard to find — photography Web site offers the ability to publish
photographs for free, so I can easily send them off to friends and family.
However, it would be difficult for me to recommend the HP digital camera
line to others without some strong caveats about installation problems and
ease-of-use.

Installing Under Windows ME

The original installation in May had only one significant hitch:  The ACD
See image display software had a missing .dll file, and was not usable as
the primary image-handling program.  Note that computer novices might be
intimidated by such a situation, in which one software application fails to
install completely but another is available and does basically the same
job.  Undaunted, I was off and taking pictures within half an hour — and
without placing a call to customer support.

Installing Under Windows XP

In October, I upgraded the photography PC to Microsoft’s new Windows XP.
That’s when my problems came to a head.  I upgraded the PC “in place,”
which is the approach recommended by Microsoft.  Upgrading in place puts
the new Windows XP operating system underneath all existing software
applications and their settings.  The alternative is to wipe all the
software and data from the hard drive and start from scratch — called a
“clean install.”  I opted for the Microsoft-recommended “in place”
approach.
HP’s Web site states that the C315 camera enjoys native support under
Windows XP. Using the camera with the new technology Microsoft added to
Windows XP is easy:  Users simply connect the camera through a USB cable to
the PC.  Although the HP Web site is technically correct, that connection
method works only when Windows XP has been upgraded with a clean install —
or XP is installed at the PC factory.  And, worse, the C315 works only if
consumers avoid using the photo manipulation software that ships with the
camera.

The Consumer's Frustration

After several hours of detective work, I learned that the photo transfer
software that ships with the HP camera interferes with the native support
built into the Windows XP operating system.  As a result, attempts to move
photos from the camera and into the PC resulted in an error condition that
prohibits the photo transfer.  My frustration culminated when I tried to
print out the precise instructions from the Web site and follow them to the
letter — but to no avail, as nowhere does HP say to stop using the software
included with the camera when switching to Windows XP.

Diagnosing the Problem

The camera documentation states that the digital media chip in the camera
must be formatted before it can be used to store photographs.  This is
normally done within the camera itself.  But, under Windows XP, the camera
and its digital media appear to Windows XP as a removable disk drive.  And
disk drives, as every PC user knows, can be formatted.  Frustrated by a
lack of instructions, I eventually tried having Windows format the digital
media in the camera, which failed with a severe error message from XP.

Upgrading C315’s Read-Only Memory

At this point, I had about one aggravating hour invested in trying to get
the camera to work.  Moreover, I had a load of vacation photographs that I
wanted to save, so I could take the camera on an upcoming trip.  So, I
decided to press on to the next approach.  I thought that, like a few other
applications under XP, the HP camera would be happier with the
reinstallation of the application software.  At the end of the
reinstallation, the software checked over the Internet for updates — a very
good software practice.  And there it was:
“There is a newer version of the camera read-only memory available.”  I
figured this must mean that the six-month-old camera needed a ROM upgrade
to run under the new Windows XP.
The ROM upgrade failed because the Windows XP “disk” formatting process —
which Windows said had failed — had changed the camera’s digital media in
some fashion.  That’s when I called HP technical support — a single call
that cost HP more than the retail price of the camera based on industry
help-desk research Aberdeen Group has conducted over several years.

HP Tech Support Solved the Immediate Problem, But …

I give high grades to the HP support technician who took my call.  He
listened carefully to the steps I had taken, did a triage on the multiple
problems, and talked me through the solutions.  We were done in about 45
minutes.  However, after that call, I could only transfer photos using some
of the features of the HP application software.  Despite HP’s tech support
assurances and the XP instructions I found on the Web site, I could not get
native Windows XP support to work.

Eureka!
About a week later, I identified the problem:  The application software
that ships with the camera, even when updated with the latest changes over
the Internet, is incompatible with Windows XP.  But this major-league
problem is not documented anywhere I searched on HP’s support Web site, nor
was the HP support technician aware of it.
The solution to achieve native HP digital camera support under Windows XP
is not to install the HP photo transfer software that comes with the
camera.  However, because this solution is not documented anywhere, my
industry experience tells me that there will be many unhappy HP camera
owners who happen to upgrade to Windows XP.  And consumers who unwittingly
buy a new HP PC and a C315 digital camera bundled together, and then make
the mistake of following the camera’s installation instructions, are likely
to fall into the same consumer hell that I experienced.

Aberdeen Conclusions

The economic law of consumer electronics is carved in stone:  You can’t
afford to take many customer support phone calls and still make money on
mass-market products.  Clearly, HP broke this law.
By failing to document for consumers the procedures for dealing with a long-
anticipated upgrade to Windows XP, HP is bringing unnecessary calls to its
support center while fostering an unsatisfactory consumer experience.
Our conclusion is that HP has a lot of work ahead in order to achieve world-
class leadership in consumer IT.  Here are a few suggestions:
 • Fix the internal process problem that facilitated the lack-of-
   instructions fiasco.
 • Keep instructions simple and predictable:  Consumers are different than
   IT professionals; they need simple instructions and maintenance
   procedures.  Moreover, their support expectations are higher, and pain
   tolerance lower.
 • Simplify the complex.  Easy to say, but hard to do.
As part of Aberdeen’s goal to educate our clients, it is our hope that this
Lab Journal will help readers avoid what we encoun-
tered, and thus eliminate all those client service calls and Web site
searches.  With some luck, HP will get the message out to its customers
quickly and repeatedly, so the company can get back to its goal of
increasing consumer mind share, instead of fielding queries from frustrated
customers.
The lesson for consumers learned here is that programs and devices that
worked fine with prior versions of Microsoft operating systems may or may
not work well under XP.  When problems occur, check the Web site
immediately for an update on how to use the product under Windows XP.
                                                               Peter Kastner



-----------------------

                         About Aberdeen Laboratories

The  mission  of  Aberdeen  Laboratories  is  to  qualitatively   test   the
consumer’s ex-
perience with mass market IT products.  We  evaluate  real  products  as  we
think real consumers would.  Our goal is two-
fold:  to educate consumers and to assist our clients in improving the  out-
of-the-box experience and lifecycle of con-
sumer IT. For more information about Aberdeen Labs, please click here.



-----------------------
Lab Journal

InSight


