













Table of Contents
Table of Contents	i
I.	Introduction / Objectives	1
A.  Objectives	1
B.	Methodology of new Positioning, Branding and Lifecycle Model.	1
II.	Aberdeen’s Market Positioning	1
B.	Aberdeen’s Positioning Statement	1
B.	Competitive Landscape	2
A. Benefits of the Lifecycle Consulting Model	2
B. Business Model – “Lifecycle Consulting:  Research Made Personal”	3
III.	Solution Selling Aberdeen Products & Services	6
A.	What is Solution Selling?	6
B.	Determining Client’s Needs (Sales Data Sheet & Qualifying Questions)	6
C.	Proposing the Product (Sales Scenarios)	6
D.	Client Questions	7
E.	Best Sales Practices  (And  Always)	10
F.	Worst Sales Practices  (And  Never)	10


I.	Introduction / Objectives
A.  Objectives 
        ◦ To ensure that all Aberdeen employees understand who we are and what we do.  
        ◦ Review Aberdeen’s market positioning and branding and explain how Aberdeen differentiates itself in the market. 
        ◦ Review Aberdeen’s customer engagement model including benefits and new workshop engagements.
        ◦ Provide information on how to “solution sell” Aberdeen’s customer engagement model.  

B.	Methodology of new Positioning, Branding and Lifecycle Model.
        ◦ Early in 2000, Aberdeen contracted with a marketing consultant to review our current positioning and recommend a new branding strategy that is more aligned with the current needs of our clients.  
        ◦ Throughout the past year, the consultant worked closely with senior management to develop and validate Aberdeen’s positioning and messaging strategy.
        ◦ At the same time, the consultant was working on the new branding; Aberdeen’s internal marketing team began working on expanding our product line to align more closely with our new positioning and branding.
        ◦ The following material will review the end results of this consulting engagement as well as Aberdeen’s updated business model.  
II.	Aberdeen’s Market Positioning
    B. Aberdeen’s Positioning Statement 
        ◦ Aberdeen is a leader in market analysis and positioning services that help business technology suppliers establish leadership in fast-changing markets.
        ◦ Aberdeen’s customers include senior management in both established and start-up business technology suppliers who need to understand technology market changes and position their products successfully in crowded markets.  
        ◦ Aberdeen provides technology market vision and analysis, strategy validation and positioning services, including the education of end-users, sales forces and the media.
        ◦ Key benefits are actionable positioning strategies that will set clients products apart from the competition and positioning implementation?????
B.	Competitive Landscape
        ◦ Unlike Gartner, who has multiple analysts on projects and a business model that is stove piper with virtual practices, Aberdeen analysts are able to provide more customized one-on-one consulting services with a stronger focus on emerging markets.  
        ◦ Unlike Forrester, whose focus is on the industry perspective 2-3 years out and business model is subscription based, Aberdeen’s business model is custom consulting with a focus on helping clients position their products for success in the next six to twelve months.
        ◦ Unlike Meta Group whose business model is very similar to Gartner Groups model, Aberdeen’s is engagement focused.
        ◦ Unlike IDC who tends to be the suppliers choice for numbers rather then analysis, Aberdeen
        ◦ Unlike AMR,kjlkj
        ◦ Unlike management consulting firms that are broad based professional services firms with small niche specialties, Aberdeen analysts have in-depth technical knowledge in specific technology sectors and require a minimal learning curve to get up-to-speed on a clients technology.  Coupled with strong product marketing backgrounds. ??????
A. Benefits of the Lifecycle Consulting Model 
        ◦ The lifecycle consulting business model reflects Aberdeen’s positioning: based on on-going primary market research, we position emerging technology suppliers for success.
        ◦ Responds to our customer requirements for more sophisticated consulting services.
        ◦ Provides analysts with higher revenue opportunities by engaging in more strategic consulting services.
        ◦ Fosters teamwork among analysts.
        ◦ Provides clients well-defined outcomes that can be consistently and efficiently delivered, based on a standard Aberdeen methodology. 
        ◦ Increases business development opportunities has a build in upgrade sales strategies for customers.
        ◦ Provides an ideal “first engagement” to discuss at a supplier briefing.
        ◦ Provides entry points on the product/market lifecycle.
        ◦ Creates an environment for long-term relationships with clients.
B. Business Model – “Lifecycle Consulting:  Research Made Personal”
Overview
        ◦ Aberdeen provides extensive services for technology vendors across the entire product lifecycle.  
        ◦ Our model illustrates what Aberdeen does and how emerging technology vendors can engage with us.  
Aberdeen Primary Market Research 
    • Our business model is built on over a decade of experience collecting and building primary market research on emerging technologies.  This includes both qualitative and quantitative research.  We do market surveys, multi-client studies, participates in industry events, in order to understand fundamental market questions such as “what are the underlying technology trends?”  “How do business and technology alliances affect company positioning?  Who are the competitors?  How do related market segments – such as wireless and handheld devices – impact each other?  
    • The collective efforts of these primary market research activities enable Aberdeen analysts to bring a comprehensive multi-disciplinary approach to emerging technology markets.  
Aberdeen Services
        ◦ What makes Aberdeen different is that we make research personal to your company.  We take all the primary market research, insights and market knowledge that’s Aberdeen has gathered and use it to help our clients at critical points during the different phases of a company’s product lifecycle.  
1.	Product Development (Go-to-Market Engagement)
        ◦ During product development, typically pre-alpha release, Aberdeen offers a Go-to-Market engagement that analyzes how shifts in markets, competition and technologies will affect marketability of a product under development.  This engagement is an in-depth diagnosis of a company’s entire value proposition, and is designed to accelerate market acceptance and increase the impact of the product launch.  
        ◦ The Go-to-Market engagement will combine analysis with practical strategies to enhance:
    • Overall marketability and value proposition to the customer.
    • Product differentiation in crowded or fragmented markets.
    • Product positioning, anticipating changes in market requirements.
        ◦ Aberdeen can also validate strategies through confidential interviews with senior business executives in the target market.  The results can be used to refine and implement our Go-to-Market Strategy.
2.	Launch Planning
        ◦ During a client’s launch planning, typically six months before launch, Aberdeen offers a progressive series of custom engagements that are designed to maximize the impacts and results from product launch.  
        ◦ These engagements are structured as interactive dialogue between senior managers and an Aberdeen analyst.  They are modular and flexible and can be purchased in a series or stand-alone depending on the clients needs.  
    • Market Knowledge Engagement
During this engagement, Aberdeen will review crucial elements in the client’s market and deepen the client’s knowledge of market trends, competitive landscape, market size and drivers, and strategic shifts in the market.  As a result of this engagement clients will have a more thorough understanding of how market trends will affect their current product positioning.  
    • Positioning Engagement
This engagement will focus on optimizing a client’s product position in the current market as well as future markets, taking into account shifts in technology, competition and customer requirements.  The engagement will result in discovery internal perception of the client’s product positioning and how market trends, new technologies and competitive positioning will affect product positioning, based on Aberdeen primary market research.
    • Alliance Engagement
Our Alliance engagement will help identify strategic partners and alliances that accelerate time-to-market distribution, and market acceptance for clients.
    • Messaging Engagement
During our Messaging engagement, we’ll optimize messages for different channels and partners; communicate product messages effectively in crowded markets.
        ◦ All our consulting engagements leverage in-depth knowledge of each clients market, enabling clients to hone their message and position themselves for maximum success.
        ◦ Once the engagement is complete, Aberdeen can validate strategies through confidential interviews with senior business executives in the target market.  The results can be used to refine and implement strategies for positioning, alliances, and messaging.
Product Launch
        ◦ During a company’s launch phase, Aberdeen can help the client to accelerate understanding of complex markets and communicate the company’s position to potential customers, the media, and investors.  In the evolving service provider market, it can help make sense of shifting technologies, competitors, services, and standards, and clearly identify business implications.
    • Message Amplification
Aberdeen can help with message amplification by taking the results of previous engagements and creating impactful deliverables that help to educate a clients market and explain a clients key values and positioning.  Additionally, we can help explain through written and spoken materials, including interactive web casts, executive overviews, white papers, and speaking engagements.
    • Strategy Acceleration
Clients needing a “turbo-charge” of their messages and a way to drive their messages through their sales channel can work with us on a Strategy Acceleration engagement.  This engagement is focused on aligning a client’s sales channel with their positioning messages, and carrying them through the marketplace. 
    • Retainer
Finally, clients can engage in an on-going relationship with Aberdeen through our retainer services program.  This service provides on-going support and contact with an Aberdeen analyst to help clients with the media, inquiries and on-going consulting.  
Wrap-up
        ◦ Whether you choose to work with us on conducting primary market research, a strategy engagement during your product launch, or simple just on a retainer basis.  Always remember that an Aberdeen analyst will help you with whatever your needs may to help position and launch your products for success.
    III. Solution Selling Aberdeen Products & Services 
        A. What is Solution Selling?
        ◦ Solution selling is a sales approach that stimulates demand and generates interest and new business.  It is based on reengineering the buying vision of the prospect to focus on your product and service. 
        ◦  The basic principle behind solution selling is controlling the sales process and the flow of the proposal to close without controlling the through targeted questioning and open discussion.  Once the pain is acknowledged, solutions can be offered and buyers will purchase.
        ◦ The basic principles of solution selling include:
    • No pain, no gain
    • Diagnose before you prescribe
    • Pain flows through the entire organization
    • “Solution” = Buying Visions
    • People make emotional decisions for logical reasons
    • People buy from people
    • Make yourself equal before you make yourself different
    • Don’t close before it is closeable
    • You can’t sell to someone who can’t buy
        ◦ Create a vision of a solution. 
“From what you have said, I can see you are struggling with gaining broad market awareness of your products/services.  If you were able to present our products through…(offer Aberdeen solution)”.

        B. Determining Client’s Needs (Sales Data Sheet & Qualifying Questions)
    • Anytime you are talking to your prospect or client about Aberdeen, you should be diagnosing what the prospects/clients needs are.  One way to diagnose a client’s needs is to ask specific questions that qualify a client for a specific Aberdeen product / service. 
        C. Proposing the Product (Sales Scenarios)
Go-To-Market
	ABC company has a budget of $100,000 to spend in 
	
“One thing I might mention to you which could be helpful is our Aberdeen Go-to-Market Engagement.  It is a brief consulting engagement – we can complete it in a week – where we will evaluate your product against our methodology for emerging companies.  A number of our clients have found it incredibly valuable at your stage of development – just a few insights about market trends could be very helpful to you as you complete development.  It is a diagnostic session where we benchmark your product against market trends, our own market forecasts, you’re current positioning.  We recommend potential partnerships and alliances that may help in speeding your product to market, analyze where the market (and your competitors) will be when you are ready to launch, and how you can effectively position yourself for success well in advance.  Given where you are right now, it can really help ensure that your product will be well received in the market and that you will be able to take advantage of future opportunities for growth.  It is reasonably priced – just a ½% of your total funding – or $50,000.”

Scenario 3


Scenario 4

        D. Client Questions
    Q. I don’t have any money for this?”
A.	“You’re not the first person who said that and later became an Aberdeen client!  Sure you do, but the money may not be the market research budget.  Aberdeen Group is a market analysis and positioning company that provides services for business technology.  It’s our mission to assist clients in getting the most market traction for their dollar.  Our clients find the budget for our services because Aberdeen is a catalyst for other marketing investments.  Likely budget buckets include product launch, PR, advertising and media, and sales training…”
	
    Q. I went to Gartner and they told me they ???
        A. Gartner’s main business is telling IT executives who the winning and losing suppliers will be.  Aberdeen works directly with clients to take greatest advantage of the client’s best suitability and expected market conditions.

    Q. “We have heard the initial market response to our value proposition.  Could Aberdeen tell us what it really means and where we should invest our resources for success?
        B. Our Positioning Strategy workshop would evaluate your input
A.	An Aberdeen RAMP would provide you with unbiased market input.

    Q. “What factors are stopping prospecting buyers from acquiring products from us?  How can we cross the chasm”?
A.	Aberdeen can identify market, product and timing issues that influence a client’s success.  But ultimately it is usually ruthless execution by the client’s management that gets them across the chasm.

    Q.  “How can we differentiate our products and services from the competition in such a way that the majority of IS decision makers will see us as the safe choice for the future?
        A. Aberdeen position workshops are specifically designed to answer just that question.

    Q. “What should we do to rebuild momentum?  An if we cannot rebuild momentum, how can we best extend our products’ life while using our key assets to enter new, high growth markets?”
        A. Go-to-Market workshop and value proposition.

    Q. “How do you think our company can become #1 in our market place?”
        A. “Ha!  In most cases, that’s by defining a market focus on a segment where you are best suited to being.  The dominant player – the big fish in a small pond.”

    Q. “How do we maintain the loyalty of our installed base and hold off competition from alternative technologies?”
        A. kjlkj

    Q. “How do we motivate our installed based to continue to invest in our products to maximize the return on their past investments?”
        B. kjlkj

    Q. Just what is Aberdeen?  I’m interested in what your position in the analyst space is?  (shouldn’t this be our branding statement?)
    A. Aberdeen is a firm who looks over the technology landscape from an independent analyst perspective and leverages that knowledge into highly effective consulting for our clients.  As analysts, we meet with virtually every company who builds or delivers a technology solution.  We are often quoted in the press, interviewed on television and radio, broadcast over the Internet, and cited as industry experts by complementary and competitive organizations.  As consultants, we work one-on-one with clients on strategty issues such as market positioning, competitive analysis, alliance partnerships, international expansion and future trends.  The result of our consulting work is often a written deliverable, a speech, a web cast, or presentation to the board of investment community.

    Q. Why are you so expensive?  I can get the same service from my local consultant for a quarter of what you charge.
    A. Our pricing is based on value delivered.  When I work with you, I have the depth of Aberdeen behind me, which includes over 45 analysts, a body of ready research, and unparallel industry expertise.  When you buy me, you get the firm.

    Q. Aren’t you basically the same as Yankee Group?
    A. In some ways, yes.  We have analysts, research associates, and sales people.  We write reports and study the markets.  The big difference between Yankee and us is that we focus entirely on the suppliers of technology for our business.  ????

    Q. How can you do consulting work for me while you are working closely with all my competitors?
    A. While it is true that we expect briefings from your competitors, we generally do no perform fee-based services for competing companies.  In addition, it is essential that all work with Aberdeen be under non-disclosure regardless of whether either of us signs an NDA formally.






        E. Best Sales Practices  (And  Always)  
        ◦ Identify a compelling reason for a prospect to engage with Aberdeen.
        ◦ Show samples of your work and/or provide the supplier with examples of your services.
        ◦ Learn and agree on what the potential obstacles are for the client. 
        ◦ Build trust with your prospect/client!
        ◦ Demonstrate your “expertise” in your prospects/clients technology area.
        ◦ Use words that convey confidence and power.
        ◦ Maintain positive your relationships with your satisfied clients; the best prospect is a happy client.
        ◦ Show a ROI to the customer.
        ◦ Be patient!  It is counterproductive to try to move too fast and 

        F. Worst Sales Practices  (And  Never)
        ◦ Don’t threaten or extort.
        ◦ Belittle a client’s opportunity.
        ◦ Guarantee success.
        ◦ Imply one engagement or workshop will solve all the client’s problems.
        ◦ Talk before listening.
        ◦ Use a hard sell.
        ◦ Don’t be discouraged by rejection, keep trying!

.
