
IT Deflation:  When 30% More Processing Power Means Flat Revenue
Recent earnings results by the top hardware companies have been inflated by
positive currency adjustments.  Lurking below these generally positive
results are steep technology deflation -- on the order of 30% a year for
servers.  IT buyers are astutely replacing older boxes with much more
powerful machines, but at the same and often lower prices.  With fewer
servers, operations management labor costs are decreased.  Ominously,
today's servers usually have fewer processors than their predecessors,
which is a real problem for software companies who license by the
processor.  Meanwhile on the PC front, users are turning the supply chain
on the IT vendors, using techniques such as online auctions to drive
purchase prices to the quote level of today's most desperate vendor.  All
of these changes have created fierce price-driven competition in the once
gentlemanly IT sales community.  What is less clear to buyers is that the
IT industry has to make a profit somewhere to offset all those pre- and
post-sales services that buyers are used to.  Commodity prices and cradle-
to-grave services do not go hand in hand.
 
Big Changes Hit the Storage Market
Enterprise storage decisions used to be a simple matter of dividing
gigabytes needed by capacity per disk and making a few phone calls.  That's
because all enterprise disk and tape storage has been treated to the same
(expensive) standards of redundancy and reliability.  Storage budgets are
skyrocketing due to new compliance issues, data replication for operational
realtime and decision support applications, and the proliferation of
personal data from PCs and project data from an all-electronic design
world.  IT buyers are realizing that not every data byte has the same value
to the enterprise, and that the value may change over time.  This is
leading new thinking about pools of storage controlled by an information
life-cycle management policy, and opening the doors to new classes of lower-
cost storage devices and architectures.
 
An IT-Empowered Customer is a Happy Customer
Any car buyer who has walked in to a showroom with an Internet printout of
the dealer's costs has felt the power of information.  At least a third of
the population in the U.S. considers themselves IT savvy, and another third
at least competent.  This megachange in personal IT sophistication is being
used by self-empowered consumers to be better shoppers and buyers.  The
empowered consumer wants information on demand, which means on the 'Net
before the store run, at kiosks near the point-of-sale, and on the shelf. 
The consumers also are demanding the power to do it themselves,
specifically in-store checkout.  But loyalty must be bought and won
repeatedly.  That means opt-in customer affinity programs backed by
sophisticated decision-support-backed promotion systems.  These trends are
driving increased IT spending on retail automation, customer relationship
management, and analytics by savvy retailers, both online and at stores.
End of an Era? Is best-of-breed nearing extinction?
For decades, large and small companies have purchased dozens or hundreds of
technologies from large numbers of distinct, but diverse, technology firms.
Now, the landscape is changing. CIOs see the cost of integrating
applications from different vendors as a more expensive route than if they
had bought it all from one vendor anyway. CFOs like applications that come
pre-integrated as these possess reduced opportunities for inaccurate data,
integration gaps, fraud and other adverse consequences. The size of
technology firms is changing, too. Not long ago, the multi-billion dollar
technology club contained just a handful of technology firms as members.
Not so today. These newer, colossal firms possess astronomical R&D budgets
that dwarf many of their competitors. While many of today's most successful
technology firms started in someone's garage or basement, it may be much
harder to replicate that success today. There are, though, some success
strategies that work for best of breed vendors and we'd love to discuss
them with you.

Value in IT is All Relative
Not every IT initiative with a low total cost of ownership (TCO) or great
return on investment (ROI) is getting funded. This is often frustrating to
technology firms but it points out that the decision making dynamics within
corporations have changed and so too are the priorities of corporate
executives. A great ROI is helpful in selling technology only if the
technology addresses an executive's top 3-5 pain points. What business
executives are doing is refining the filters they use to evaluate future
technology purchases. They've also changed the way they buy. The executive
committee is king now and many of these want high ROI projects that take
weeks (not months or years) to implement with immediate benefits delivery.
Lastly, IT buyers want real proof that benefits do accrue to users of new
technologies. Corporate IT buyers are no different than consumer buyers:
they want it all (low cost, high value, etc.). The definition of value in
IT is continuing to morph - call us to find out where the value parameters
are headed next. 
Shopping Addicts - When Big Companies Overbuy IT
Some companies have never met a technology they didn't like. A peek inside
some of the world's largest firms indicates that these companies are the
proud owners of not one but dozens of redundant, overlapping pieces of
software. They may even have multi-million dollar purchases of name brand
software still sitting, unwrapped, on a shelf waiting for the day, someday,
when it, too, will be installed. Smart CIOs and CFOs are rationalizing
their IT purchases.  Redundant hardware and software is being eliminated.
Remote data centers are being consolidated. Like any good seven step
recovery process, the first thing many firms must do is accept that they
have a problem. Find out how big the problem can be, the discipline
required to bring these costs under control and what better firms are doing
to avoid over-paying for IT.
Who holds the upper hand in business? Surprise - Consumers are more
empowered than ever and have more influence than most realize
While many business publications, academics and pundits write about channel
masters like Dell Computer and Wal-Mart, few look at the real driver of
their successes: the modern consumer. The modern consumer is an educated,
online, interconnected shopping machine that is forcing tremendous change
on virtually firm on the planet. The modern consumer wants extraordinarily
low pricing, wide selection, great service and more. They want the ability
to buy anything from anywhere with a never-ending set of purchase options.
The modern consumer wants to purchase goods and services in stores, over
the phone, over the web, via their PDA, etc. They want mass customization
and they want it now. The modern consumer is driving the adoption of
numerous technologies at every step of the manufacturing, distribution and
sales processes of firms today. Automated replenishment, RFID tags, new
process designs, enhanced parcel tracking and other innovations are
partially or totally attributed to the rise of power of the modern
consumer.
You are what you do, not what you say — Consumer tracking in real-time
Used to be that consumer market research used lots of surveys and focus
groups, supplemented by a few hundred closely watched consumers such as the
Neilsen families. Since consumers knew that their responses were being
tabulated, the survey answers often did not match up with the buying
behavior.  Fast forward to today, where savvy Internet marketers are
tracking every click an online consumer makes, and feeding that data to
real-time analytics programs that sift the marketing wheat from the chaff.
These data from anonymous web users provides valuable clues about real-
world behavior by unsuspecting web browsers, enabling marketers to better
hone both their click and brick consumer marketing programs.  However, not
all the data is collected anonymously, meaning consumers have less privacy
on the web than ever before.  So far, the hue and cry of privacy advocates
is muted.  But will consumers put up with an electronic minder tracking
their every click?
Laptops in Limbo:  Is unwired off the track?
 In a recent survey of the buyers of 750,000 business computers, Aberdeen
found few takers for increasing corporate laptop use dramatically beyond
the 30% level already achieved.  Yes, road warriors are already their
second or third generation machines.  But they comprise well under 10% of
enterprise users in most organizations.  The big corporate laptop bet is on
corridor cruisers, the white-collar workers whose day consists of meetings
and collaboration.  But disconnected laptops deliver only marginal
productivity improvements over desktops.  The key ingredient is a wireless
network, but WiFi scares many executives fearful of security, support, and
high initial cost issues.  Without more business laptop users, the huge
recent capital investments in wireless infrastructure for so-called hot
spots will be hard put to turn a profit.  Will 2004 see a breakthrough in
laptop buying that spurs a new round of enterprise productivity gains?
Being your partner’s keeper:  enterprise management in a web services world
Billions of dollars have been invested in enterprise management
technologies to run the complex and distributed computer systems, networks,
applications, and business processes that fuel the inward-facing enterprise
value chain.  These management software products allow a small group of
technicians to better control critical systems.  Without them, many
businesses would be at considerable risk.  But extended value chains are
vastly complicating the process, since partners demand to have control of
their own systems.  New technologies are evolving that allow for acceptable
levels of partner-system management and control without impinging on the
value chain partner’s own process prerogatives.  Will adoption of these
partner-keeper technologies happen fast enough to lower the risk of large
new value-chain integration projects?
Sarbanes-Oxley, Basel II and other new requirements - Are the cures worse
than the problems they solve? compliance
Sarbanes-Oxley compliance is costing affected businesses a minimum of
several hundred thousand to several million dollars a year. Compliance
costs are driving some firms to revert to a privately held status, as the
economic costs of compliance are so corrosive to earnings. For those that
remain publicly traded, what are the right technology strategies to meet
the new compliance requirements of today's business world and not go broke
doing so? Beyond the internal changes these new reporting requirements
dictate, how will Sarbanes-Oxley affect business-to-business transactions?
What business processes are affected and how?

