Why Aberdeen is Following Consumer PC Deals
The Aberdeen Digital Consumer Technology practice examines market trends and dynamics in consumer and small office/home office electronic technology.  The consumer market changes much more rapidly than the enterprise desktop market, where configuration stability is paramount and prices are hidden—while consumer PC prices are right there for all to see.

Because the consumer PC industry is a proxy for semiconductor, software, and other markets, we are tracking a number of research issues:
        ◦ Which major consumer brand offers the most PC value at a given price point, and do the brand leaders change over time?
        ◦ What is the velocity of price/value changes, as lower cost electronic components flow through to the end user consumer-buyer?
        ◦ How quickly does new technology reach consumers?
        ◦ How are promotions and rebates used to stimulate demand?
        ◦ What is the end-game for obsolescent and unsold merchandise?
        ◦ How will HP’s dual brand strategy play out in the consumer market?

Because we could not find answers to these questions, we started a long-term research project to provide the answers.  It quickly became apparent that one of our questions overlapped with basic consumer market research, namely, “who’s got the best deal this week?”  So, while our primary research will supplement Aberdeen Group’s Digital Consumer Technology practice with major semiconductor, PC suppliers, and retailers, we invite consumers to benefit from our time and effort.
The Brands That Aberdeen Follows
There are literally thousands of PC manufacturers throughout the world.  More than we can track.  Our methodology is to track the six major U.S. consumer brands — Compaq, Dell, eMachines, Gateway, Hewlett-Packard, and Sony — at the manufacturer’s online stores and at their major retail channel partners.  At this time, we are not tracking Apple Computer, a major player, because it has no head-to-head competition.

We make no claim that these are the best deals out there for comparable equipment, or that our research is exhaustive.  But we do believe we are covering the bulk of the consumer market, and more than a representative sample of the mass-market retail channel.
How We Choose the Winning PC Deals
Aberdeen Group has developed a price-value methodology to reduce what can easily become an exercise in subjectivity.  Our methodology won’t apply to all users, but we think most consumers will be well satisfied by looking at their next PC’s functionality in the following hierarchy of values:
    1. PC microprocessor speed and cache size
There are significant architectural differences between AMD and Intel chips.  That said, we would pick the faster chip with the greatest cache size and faster bus within an architecture.  Thus, a 1.8GHz Pentium 4 beats a 1.8 GHz Celeron because the Pentium 4 has a greater cache size.  Serious performance addicts will check out one of the many PC performance rating sites for an in-depth evaluation.
    2. Memory Size and Speed
More memory is better, and faster memory is better.  Our tests show that a 128MB PC is significantly slower than a 256MB machine, and multimedia hobbyists will want to consider 512MB.  DDR memory is faster than plain old SDRAM, while RDRAM makes sense for high-end Pentium 4s.
    3. Integrated Modem and Network Interface
No reason to give up valuable expansion slots to these necessary functions.  An integrated 56Kb modem and 10/100 Ethernet should be standard.
    4. Hard Drive Size
Faster is better than bigger.  A 7200 RPM hard drive retrieves data more quickly than a 5400 RPM drive.  Beyond that, today’s entry 40GB hard drive is adequate for most users, while 80GB will satisfy all but the multimedia archivists.
    5. Monitor
Decent 17” monitors cost less than $100 in a bundle, so we see no need to squint into a 15” monitor.  Beyond that, a flat tube is desirable.  A 19” upgrade provides 40% more pixel real estate.  And a 19” flat-panel monitor is to die for.  While many buyers already have a serviceable monitor, the retail in-store deals often come in a bundle with a monitor and a printer. 
    6. Operating System
Many home users will be more than satisfied by Microsoft’s XP Home edition.  However, power users, home office users, and small businesses could benefit from Windows XP Professional.  XP Pro is more valuable than XP Home.
    7. Printer
Amazing, but creditable color printers cost a mere $50 and up.  These are often thrown into the PC and monitor bundle to maximize the manufacturer’s and retailer’s margin on the sale—while creating another customer for profitable ink and paper.  We give credit for higher quality printers.  However, no one should buy a PC just for the printer.
    8. Software Bundle
Some software just enables functionality, such as a CD burner.  Other software, such a Microsoft Office, makes a home PC function more easily as an office PC.

Given all of the above criteria, we then look at the final consumer price, which we calculate as store list price minus rebates plus shipping charges.  Sales taxes are not factored into our calculation.  Rebates are the PC industry’s way of adjusting supply and demand without having to change the posted “list” price.  

This column will be commenting weekly about general and manufacturer-specific pricing actions.  Some observations as we have tracked the market for ninety days:
        ◦ Online stores adjust their prices through changing rebates quite often, sometimes several times in a week.  Retailers tend to use advertising-driven weekly cycles;
        ◦ Rebates are complex, and net price/value is not always easy to ascertain;
        ◦ What with numerous rebate coupons—six would be on the low side for a store purchase—and complicated fulfillment requirements, consumers should be prepared for a long wait to get their rebate checks.  We are still waiting for half the rebate checks on a PC purchased April 15th.
