SOURCE FILE: 2004-AberdeenTelelogicAgrFINAL-5.doc
STUDY ID: 2004-aberdeentelelogicagrfinal-5-8fd44a
TITLE: Aberdeen Group Consulting Agreement — Telelogic (February 2004)
AUTHOR: Aberdeen Group
DATE: 2004-02-26

[Page 1]
AberdeenGroup
February 26, 2004

Joe Charron
Telelogic
9401 Jeronimo Rd.
Irvine, CA 92618

Dear Joe,

Thank you for your interest in the Aberdeen Group.

Pursuant to our earlier conversations, we are pleased to provide the attached Agreement to establish an Aberdeen Research Service relationship with Telelogic.

The components of this program have been tailored to meet your specific requirements combining access to Aberdeen's primary research, consulting and market visibility services. The terms and conditions of this relationship are outlined in this Agreement.

Please contact me directly at (617)854-5331 with any questions. We look forward to working with you and the Telelogic team over the coming year.

Sincerely,
Jim Schaffer
Global Account Manager
Aberdeen Group
617-854-5331
jim.schaffer@aberdeen.com

Please FAX to Jim Schaffer at (617)723-7897

[Page 2]
AberdeenGroup
Client Service Agreement

This Service Agreement is between Aberdeen Group, Inc. (Aberdeen) and the "Client" as identified below, and consists of this cover page and the attached Terms and Conditions.

Client
Company: Telelogic
Name: Joe Charron
Address: 9401 Jeronimo Rd, Irvine
State: CA
Zip Code: 92618
Telephone: 949-885-2416
E-mail: joe.charron@telelogic.com
Sales Executive: Jim Schaffer
Service Name: It@aberdeen.com
Analysts: Wayne Kernochan
Start Date: 03-01-04
End Date: 02-28-05
Service Level: Gold
Service Fee: 5,000
Service tracks(s) and additional deliverables:
  Development Solutions: Wayne Kernochan — see Schedule A
  UML White Paper — see Schedule B
Billing Terms:
  50% upon execution
  50% upon delivery of first draft of white paper, if begun by August 31,
  otherwise according to schedule below until completion of draft:
    August 31, 2004
    November 30, 2004
Other Comments:
  1. Includes replay rights for one year for webinars
Proposal Valid to 02-27-04

[Page 3]
AberdeenGroup
TERMS AND CONDITIONS

Advisory Services: Advisory Services are offered for twelve-month periods, beginning on the first day of the calendar month after the Start Date hereof. Advisory Services shall automatically renew for additional twelve-month terms unless notice of intention to terminate that Service is received in writing from either party at least thirty (30) days prior to the annual expiration date.

Publications and Consulting: Publications and consulting are customized services provided to clients. Scope and timeline are mutually developed on an ongoing basis between the client and Aberdeen.

Payment Terms: All fees for services and reimbursements are due within thirty (30) days of invoice date. All fees are due and payable in U.S. dollars. Applicable state and local taxes will be billed in accordance with current requirements.

Intellectual Property: Aberdeen retains sole ownership of the copyright and other intellectual property rights of any Aberdeen publication, courseware or other copyrighted deliverables that result from this Agreement. Subject to the terms of this Agreement, Aberdeen grants Client a fully paid, non-exclusive license to post the Aberdeen publications on its intranet, extranet or WWW site for use in its marketing and customer education initiatives. The term of this license as to a particular Aberdeen publication shall be one year beginning on the delivery to Client of that particular Aberdeen publication. Client may not otherwise make additional copies of Aberdeen publications or deliverables; however, Client may request additional copies from Aberdeen at Aberdeen's then current price.

Cancellation Policy: Aberdeen services are not cancelable unless agreed to in writing by both parties. Aberdeen shall have the right to retain any sums already paid by Client hereunder, and Client shall pay for all services performed and progress payments due as of the effective date of termination.

Assignment: This Agreement shall be binding on the successors and assigns of the parties.

Applicable Law: The laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall govern the interpretation and definition of rights under this Agreement. All actions arising out of or in connection with this Agreement shall be brought in the state or federal courts of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and both parties irrevocably consent to the exclusive jurisdiction of such courts and waive any objections as to venue or inconvenience of the forum.

Warranty: Aberdeen represents and warrants that it shall use commercially reasonable efforts to provide Services in conformance with generally accepted standards of good practice and applicable laws, rules, and regulations.

Liability: To the maximum extent permitted by law: (i) Aberdeen's maximum liability for damages to Client under this Agreement, regardless of the form of legal action, whether in contract or in tort, including negligence, shall in no event exceed the actual payments received by Aberdeen for the Aberdeen publication, Service or other deliverable that caused such damage; and (ii) in no event shall Aberdeen be liable for incidental, consequential, exemplary, special or indirect damages (including, but not limited to, lost business profits, revenues, goodwill, and other indirect damages), even if Aberdeen has been advised of the possibility of the same or if reasonably foreseeable.

Entire Agreement: The entire agreement between the parties regarding the subject matter hereof is contained in this Service Agreement. Waivers or amendments will be effective and enforceable against a party if signed by an authorized representative of that party.

By signing below, Client's representative confirms that he/she is an authorized purchaser of services for Client.

Accepted by:
Client: Telelogic
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
[Signature lines]

[Pages 4-6]
Schedule A
Aberdeen Research and Market Intelligence

Aberdeen Research publications are accessible to Development Solutions clients via the secured, members' only section of the Aberdeen Web site.

Primary Research Data and Analysis: Development Solutions members will have access to the raw data of all IT research projects (downloadable Excel spreadsheet; cross-tabulations/analyses at client request).

Market Research Reports: Access to any new Aberdeen market research report in Research Topic area(s) and related topic areas.

Aberdeen White Papers, Viewpoints, Profiles and Impacts: Access to all new Aberdeen research and news analysis documents published in all IT Related Topic areas.

Aberdeen Insights, Perspectives, SnapShots, and Solution Spotlights: Web-only Thought Leadership and research documents on secured Aberdeen Web site.

Online Research Publication Library: All Aberdeen research documents, thought leadership publications and survey research available to Development Solutions clients.

Aberdeen has prepared a formal Publication and Events Calendar; available upon request.

Marketing Consulting and Advisory Services

Ad hoc telephone inquiry: Reasonable telephone access to designated analyst account manager and, through him/her, access to other IT Research team members, including Enterprise and Internet Infrastructure, Data Knowledge and Analytics, and Services. Used for querying analysts about specific market events, vendors, products, and market trends.

Advisory Services and Consulting: Competitive intelligence, market positioning, marketing communications and strategy consulting services. Used for: competitive offerings intelligence, product gap analysis, M&A due diligence, marketing and positioning strategies, press/analyst relations materials review, sales collateral critique, business plan review, enterprise functional business requirements determination.

Market Visibility and Awareness Services

Potential range of visibility services:
- Press quotes from analysts
- Analysts fielding press inquiries at member's request
- Analyst fielding venture capital/investor inquiries at member's request
- Member profiled in Aberdeen SnapShot and represented in Aberdeen Supplier Directory / IT Access Supplier Showcase
- Analyst participation in a member-hosted Webinar
- Member advertising in Aberdeen IT Newsletter
- Member advertising on Aberdeen's Information Technology Access community

Account Management
Wayne Kernochan, Vice President Development Solutions — designated primary analyst for Telelogic.

[Page 8]
GOLD Service Level Summary (12-month, Development Solutions):
- Ad hoc inquiry: 2 hour/month
- Qtly. Briefing: included
- Press quotes: included
- Press inquiries: included
- VC inquiries: included
- Snapshot: included
- 2 Webinars (includes replay rights for one year): included
- Access to publications library (incl. reports): included
- Access to survey research results and data: included
- Access to IT Access community content: included
- IT research symposiums: included
- Additional Products Discount: 10%

[Page 9]
Additional Products and Services (standard pricing):
- Webinar (hosted on client site): ,000
- Webinar (program with leads and marketing): 0,000
- Online reference: ,500 per
- Profile: 0,000 - 5,000 (dependent on surveys and scope)
- White paper: 0,000 - 0,000 (dependent on surveys and scope)
- One day consulting: ,000
- Speaking fee: ,000 plus expenses

[Page 10]
Schedule B
Executive White Paper

Aberdeen will write an Executive White Paper, 5-6 pages in length, on the topic area of UML (Unified Modeling Language). The paper will draw on the experiences of five Telelogic users (primarily US) that Aberdeen will interview. It is the responsibility of Telelogic to arrange the interviews in a timely fashion.

Scope:
- Examination of benefits and implementation details of UML in real-world situations, specifically in major implementations of new enterprise-class applications involving formal development methodologies
- A brief description of UML functionalities within various solution sets
- Examination of real-world situations in which UML use might be most effective in the near future
- Detailing of complementary solutions and services
- Overall conclusions and recommendations

WEB RIGHTS LICENSE
Aberdeen clients have the right to post the Executive White Paper on their intranet or World Wide Web site. This license has a one-year term, commencing on the date of delivery of the final HTML/PDF version of the Executive White Paper.
