Aberdeen Groti]?, Inc.
12 Marshall Stru t
13 os ton, , U < issctchMist tts
02108
Telephone Or 72.3 7890
FAX OF 72.3 9215
Aberdeen Group
December 5,1988
Press Advisory
Thanks!
We enjoy working with you on fast-breaking computer industry stories.
Thanks for your vote of confidence in quoting Aberdeen Group. Here are
our areas of individual expertise:
Charles T. Casale, President
John R. Logan, Executive VP
John O. Dunkle, Vice President
Peter S. Kastner, Vice President
-Financial
-Industry trends/IBM
-Supercomputers
-Technical computing
-Midrange/IBM
-DEC, H-P, etc.
-Software companies
-Distributed architectures
-WorkGroups, PC’s, & LANs
-Apple, Microsoft, Borland,
Compaq, Lotus, etc.
-UNIX
-OLTP/DBMS/Networks
-Tandem, Stratus, DEC, etc.
-Benchmarks and performance
-Vertical market applications
We are growing into new areas, as the accompanying press releases
describe.
--more-


Telephone 6/7 723 7890
TAX 617 723 9215
Aberdeen Group
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
12 Marshall Street
B os ton. Al assachnsetts
02108
NEWS RELEASE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
CONTACT: Charles T. Casale
(617) 723-7890
Aberdeen Group Picks Industry Veteran Peter S. Kastner
to Head New Transaction Services Business Unit
BOSTON, December 5,1988 - Aberdeen Group, Inc. announced today
the formation of a new business unit, Aberdeen Transaction Services,
headed by nineteen-year industry veteran Peter S. Kastner. Kastner,
who is general manager of the new unit, was elected an Aberdeen
vice president and a member of Aberdeen’s Board of Directors.
Aberdeen Transaction Services provides industry analysis and
consulting in the fast growing transaction processing market. The
business unit is located at Aberdeen’s corporate headquarters in
Boston.
In making the announcement, Aberdeen president Charles T. Casale
said, 'Transaction processing is growing faster than enterprises can
cope with it, particularly as they distribute computing throughout
their organizations. Aberdeen Transaction Services cuts through
confusing and conflicting industry claims, helping users
systematically plan and execute computing strategies while working
with supphers to assess what users want and are wiUing to pay for."
"We are delighted that Peter Kastner has joined us to head this
effort. Peter is widely respected for his knowledge of how buyers
use commercial systems and how suppliers put them together," Casale
said. "He was the first analyst to predict the emergence of
transaction processing at the workgroup level, a trend that will
shake up many of the established suppliers."
more -


»
Aberdeen Group
Page 2
Kastner heads new Aberdeen Transaction Services unit
Mr. Kastner has held marketing and management positions with
Digital Equipment, Prime Computer, and Stratus Computer, and has
been a consultant with Arthur D. Little.
Aberdeen Group is an international computer research and consulting
organization closely monitoring user needs, technological changes and
market developments. Based on a comprehensive analytical
framework, Aberdeen provides fresh insights into the future of
computing and its implications for users and the industry. In
addition to client-related research and consulting, Aberdeen publishes
several periodicals summarizing its analysis and research findings.
- end -


Aberdeen Group, Inc.
12 Marshall Siner
Aberdeen Group
Boston. Massachusetts
02108
-Telephone 617 723 7890
FAX 617 723 9215
Peter S. Kastner
Vice President
