
Intel’s Itanium:  Ready and Desirable for Mainframe-Class Workloads
Keywords: (IBM, zSeries, z900, xSeries, Intel, Itanium, mainframe,
workloads, Dell, HP, Microsoft)
|Issue@Hand          |                                                |
|Are platforms based on Intel Itanium® 2 processors able handle       |
|mainframe-class workloads, and their strengths and weaknesses        |
|compared to today’s mainframes, such as the IBM z990?                |
|Aberdeen Perspective|                                                |


                              Baseline Research
Over the past year, Aberdeen’s user research has raised significant
questions about the long term commitment of mainframe customers to their
platform, and has begun to indicate that Intel-based platforms are a
credible alternative.  These baseline findings are:
   1. Enterprise customers increasingly focus on their applications’, and
      therefore their platforms’ business value, including overall total
      cost of ownership (TCO), return on investment (ROI), and scalability
      over time, rather than simply on an existing commitment to a
      particular platform. Aberdeen interviewees indicate that mainframe
      hardware and associated software licensing costs are perceived as
      being more expensive than open system architecture alternatives.
|Synopsis          |                  |
|Savvy enterprise users interested in  |
|saving precious mainframe MIPS have   |
|been testing various workloads on     |
|Intel-based platforms.  The news from |
|Aberdeen field research is that 40% of|
|mainframe customers are now looking at|
|ways to offload or surround their     |
|mainframes.  Users think the latest   |
|Itanium 2 processors can power the    |
|largest workloads while providing the |
|mature stability needed to host       |
|mission-critical applications.        |
|Mainframe cost of ownership is the key|
|issue.                                |


   2. Over the last year, IBM has increasingly discounted mainframe prices
      to maintain a strong position with its customers, as they add
      applications and increase the workloads of existing applications.
   3. The absolute performance and scalability of systems based on Intel’s
      Itanium 2 processors, as demonstrated by TPC and numerous other
      industry benchmarks, have now met or surpassed virtually all
      commercial application workload requirements.
   4. Other critical application requirements, such as platform reliability
      and manageability, are being more adequately addressed by Intel-system
      suppliers than ever before.
   5. The growth of the Itanium “ecosystem” (core applications, tools, and
      enabling software for supporting commercial business applications) has
      matured.  Nearly all major enterprise business applications (EBAs)
      provide support, with customers in production.
                        2004 Field Research Findings
Aberdeen’s study during Q1-2004 to test the Issue@Hand involved in-depth
qualitative interviews with U.S., European, and Asian users of Intel
processors for mainframe workloads, as well as a quantitative survey of 98
qualified mainframe users.
Our findings are that Intel Itanium-based platforms not only are ready to
handle mainframe-class workloads, but also in many cases are the desirable
platform for these workloads — some interviewees find them to be more
scalable, equally robust and manageable, more cost-effective, more
flexible, and more programmer-productive.  Specifically, our research
indicates:
    • Real-world users report success in moving typical mainframe-class
      workloads from IBM zSeries mainframes to Intel Xeon™ processor family-
      based platforms — and seeing performance comparable to a mainframe on
      32-bit Xeon machines.  Itanium 2 is superior in performance and
      scalability to Xeon on the same platforms.
    • CPU-intensive, rather than I/O-intensive, applications deliver the
      largest immediate payback on Itanium-based platforms compared to
      mainframe ones.  These applications include not only
      technical/scientific and batch functions, but also many large-database
      applications such as data warehousing and analytics software such as
      SAS.  The nuance is that mainframe processing power is expensive, not
      that Intel platforms are deficient in I/O capacity.
    • Approximately 40% of mainframe users are open to shifting to an
      Itanium-based platform.  These users are attracted especially to
      Itanium-based platforms’ perceived total cost of ownership advantages,
      due particularly to their price/performance, and flexibility.
 Enterprises considering using Itanium for mainframe-class workloads —
 including batch, OLTP, data warehousing, enterprise application support,
 and technical/scientific — can rest assured that Itanium-based machines can
 handle the load.
    • Xeon’s ability to handle migrated mainframe-class workloads is
      evident, because mainframe-workload Xeon-based solutions are already
      in place and have been operating for one or more years.
    • Interviewees report Itanium 2-based platforms offer comparable or
      superior functionality with regard to other key user criteria —
      programmer productivity and manageability are seen by interviewees as
      at least as good as Xeon, and with robustness superior.  By these
      qualitative reports and actual benchmark results, Itanium can handle
      most if not all mainframe-class workloads.
    • Interviewees report that migrating COBOL, FORTRAN, and DB2-based
      applications from the mainframe to an Intel-based platform is
      straightforward, and does not require changes to code. Most of the
      rest of mainframe applications involve DL/1, CICS, and IBM assembler
      code, which according to some interviewees can also be migrated with
      significant but doable effort.  Several interviewees report that the
      majority of their code involves only COBOL and DB2.
    • DB2 application performance using an Intel multiprocessor platform
      appears to be more cost-effective than a typical mainframe
      configuration involving allocation of fractions of processors to the
      application in a VM (virtual machine) environment.
    • Users may also “surround” their mainframes by implementing all new
      mainframe-class applications on Itanium platforms, “offload” by having
      a new Intel-based application take over some of the workload of the
      mainframe one, or “replace” by writing a new Itanium 2-based
      application to replace the old.
    • Interviewees report that Intel-based platforms are typically better
      performing per processor, more scalable, more cost-effective, and more
      flexible (standards-based, open, and able to adapt to new technologies
      and to integrate with other platforms), more programmer-productive,
      and smaller footprint. Interviewees found the Intel platform equally
      robust and manageable.  Interviewees cited performance and cost-
      effectiveness as especially marked advantages of Intel-based
      platforms.
    • Interviewees do not view alternatives other than Intel-based platforms
      as comparable in value.  Linux on the mainframe is seen as less
      manageable and less performant.  AMD’s 64-bit Opteron technology is
      seen as less real-world-tested.
                    Aberdeen Analysis and Recommendations
Based on this research, Aberdeen concludes:
    • Itanium 2-based solution case studies and references are newly
      arrived.  Many of the success stories are just recently coming to
      production in Q1-2004.   This is news which has not been previously
      reported.
    • Enterprises considering using Itanium for mainframe-class workloads —
      including batch, OLTP, data warehousing, enterprise application
      support, and technical/scientific — can rest assured that, in almost
      all cases, Itanium-based machines can handle the load.
    • Moreover, users believe from their own tests that Itanium-based
      machines can deliver major additional benefits in
      performance/scalability, flexibility, footprint in data centers,
      programmer productivity, and cost of ownership.  At the same time,
      users say that these machines can match mainframes in robustness,
      manageability, and ability to act as a database server.
 Users believe from their own tests that Itanium-based machines can deliver
 major additional benefits in performance/scalability, flexibility,
 footprint in data centers, programmer productivity, and cost of ownership
    • CPU-intensive applications such as some batch tasks — e.g., the widely-
      implemented extract-sort-report batch programs — and
      technical/scientific jobs deliver the largest immediate payback on
      Itanium-based platforms compared to mainframe ones.
    • Users report that migration of many mainframe applications to Itanium-
      based platforms — especially Windows ones — is surprisingly easy, with
      COBOL, FORTRAN, and DB2 programs able to be recompiled with no code
      changes.  CICS, DL/1, and assembler programs remain difficult to
      migrate, requiring extensive effort.
    • “Replace” strategies that require users to rewrite mainframe
      applications from scratch take a long time to implement, with
      significant cultural resistance to new programming and administrative
      practices.  Mainframe users therefore logically tend to prefer a
      strategy of “surrounding” their mainframes by implementing all new
      mainframe-class applications on Itanium platforms, “offloading” by
      having a new Intel-based application take over some of the workload of
      the mainframe one, or migration.
    • A large minority of mainframe customers (30-40 %) are clearly
      motivated to choose Itanium-based systems in preference to more
      mainframes.  These are dissatisfied especially with the mainframe’s
      cost of ownership (due to both hardware acquisition and software
      license costs), as well as its flexible support for upcoming open
      standards and in some cases its performance.
 Intel Itanium-based platforms not only are ready to handle mainframe-class
 workloads, but also in many cases are the desirable platform for these
 workloads — some interviewees find them to be more scalable, equally robust
 and manageable, more cost-effective, more flexible, and more programmer-
 productive
Therefore, as Itanium becomes a more familiar quantity in mainframe shops,
existing and new workloads which in the past belonged exclusively on the
mainframe will increasingly be hosted on Intel’s Itanium.

Links to additional mainframe study research URLs here
-----------------------

AberdeenGroup






















