URL: http://www.computing.co.uk/computing/news/2060492/tool-vendors-neglect-intranet-needs

Tool vendors neglect intranet needs - 30 Oct 1996 - Computing 

 computing.co.uk 

Search

 Search computing.co.uk 

 Keywords: 

 Search industry 
 Keywords: 

 Search web 
 Keywords: 

Secondary Navigation

 News 

 In-depth 

 Reviews 

 Audio/Video 

 Web Seminars & Events 

 Jobs 

 Blogs 

 Forums 

 Computing Business 

 Awards 

 Subscribe 

Primary Navigation

 Home 

 Hardware 

 Software 

 Communications 

 Internet 

 Security 

 Management 

 Public sector 

 Mobile 

 RSS 

 Advertisements 

 Home >

 News >

 Other >

Tool vendors neglect intranet needs

What is the future for the IT industry? Peter Kastner of the AberdeenGroup outlined his predictions to Douglas Hayward.

Written by newmedia newmedia 

 Computing , 30 Oct 1996

Users must push development tool vendors to produce intranet-ready versions of their products, a leading US industry analyst warned last week.

Peter Kastner, group vice president of Aberdeen Group research organisation, warned that the development of intranet environments will be delayed until tools vendors treat browsers as the equal of Windows clients. The warning came amid a series of predictions for the industry over the next three years (see box).

'IT departments don't have enough resources to develop applications that people want, because they are having to develop them twice - once for existing client-server, and once for intranet,' said Kastner

'That's just mad. People are going to have to put pressure on tools developers to create new versions that treat browsers as just another client.'

Kastner, who was in the UK to visit middleware supplier BMC Software, predicted that Novell will struggle over the next few years, partly because the company failed to see the challenge of Windows NT. And also because the intranet revolution will remove the need for users to buy Novell's Directory Services software, often considered to be one of the company's key technology advantages over rivals such as Microsoft.

'You won't necessarily need Novell's Directory Services if you have a corporate intranet with a white pages facility that lists all your users and their email addresses,' Kastner said. 'I am distressed with Novell's inability to see the threats to its position over the last few years.'

Novell needs to respond to the growing trend for organisations to dump LANs based on local servers in favour of a new architecture which connects users together using intranets.

'Delta Airlines recently discovered that 1 in 16 of its employees was involved in activities concerned with the management of its 6,000 Novell servers. That's hundreds of man hours being wasted every year,' he said.

'That sort of thing is why organisations are looking at ways of putting their servers back in central sites, using high-speed networks to connect individual clients.'

Object-oriented and Internet-based technology will help to bring down IT ownership costs in the short term, but costs will initially rise as users experience a lack of skills and tools to use the new technologies, Kastner warned.

'The problem is that we are dealing with new technologies for which the industry doesn't yet have proper methodologies,' he said. 'That means costs will increase briefly as we go through the learning curve, but they will come down significantly over the longer term.'

Kastner flew into London last week with a guilty secret. While working at Chase Manhattan Bank in 1973, he wrote a system which he knew would not be year 2000-compliant.

'We knew all about the problem then, but we never thought the system we were writing would still be working in 20 years' time. We assumed it would be replaced,' he said meekly.

'In the case of another system, for bonds with maturity dates into the next century, we made sure we were prepared for the year 2000. The millennium issue isn't about bugs - it's about planned obsolescence,' he added.

THE ABERDEEN ARGUS

Aberdeen Group's predictions for the next three years:

Hardware

Intel will pick up more market share as its processors become increasingly powerful. Operating systems based on less popular chipsets will experience end-of-life problems.

Operating systems

HP will dominate the Unix pack with its 64-bit version of Unix. Windows NT will sell well but will not scale well beyond eight processors and will not wipe out Unix, MVS or OS/400.

Netscape will survive if it offers better support to corporate users than Microsoft does.

Databases

Oracle will continue to dominate, even though Informix arguably has the best architecture.

Intranet:

Intranet development will be held up by costs, until users force tools vendors into giving browsers the same importance as the Windows client. Network computer vendors will bundle WordPerfect with their devices after Corel rewrites the application in Java.

Objects

The increased use of objects will be held up by the lack of common methodologies. No single request-broker architecture will dominate the industry.

Networking

Users will move from LANs to intranets, allowing them to centralise their servers and simplify their directory services. Novell will enter a period of managed decline.

 Have your say 

 Send to a friend 

 Print this 

 Share 

Tags:

reader comments

 reader comments 

reader comments

related articles

related whitepapers

 BMC Strengthens its Market Position with the Introduction of BMC Atrium CMDB 2.0 

from BMC Software Ltd

 BMC Software Enhances CRM Efforts 

from DataFlux

 Demand Planner for Microsoft Dynamics - Effective ERP, Supply Chain, Warehouse and Inventory Management across the Supply Chain 

from Peracto Solutions

today's top stories

 Communications 

 Digital Britain: A Computing special report 

"Britain will be the broadband capital," said Gordon Brown. We look at what Digital Britain will really mean 16 Jun 2009 

 Management 

 Taking the horror out of SOA 

Widely misunderstood and wilfully abused, the term “service-oriented architecture” fills many IT leaders with dread, but behind the monstrous hype are some frightfully sound principles. So how should organisations go about putting them into practice? Computing asked leading experts for their views 16 Jun 2009 

 Business Alignment 

 CIOs - the value proposition 

I have been conducting a bit of a survey. I haven’t polled thousands of CIOs or chief executives for answers, nor have... 15 Jun 2009 

 Talking Outsourcing 

 Did outsourcing lead to MPs' expenses scandal? 

Did outsourcing cause the expenses scandal that has rocked the foundations of the Palace of Westminster in London? It’s highly likely as... 15 Jun 2009 

 Internet 

 Malware in action - hacking PCs 

Infection and attack demonstrated on camera 12 Jun 2009 

> More news 

 most read 

 most commented 

 popular topics 

Most read stories

 Computer Aid Twitters for charity 

 £600m government IT services deals up for grabs 

 Digital Britain: A Computing special report 

 90% of SAP users experiencing monthly performance problems 

 Digital Britain report formally launched 

> More 

Most commented stories

 Big success for Gordon Brown resignation e-petition 

 Unrest grows over treatment of Royal Mail IT workers 

 Data protection needs new approach 

 Virgin Trains rolls out on-board wireless internet access 

 Children's database in use after months of delays 

> More 

 cio 

 communications 

 database 

 digital-britain 

 ecommerce 

 financial-services 

 government 

 hardware 

 internet 

 leadership 

 management 

 mobile 

 outsourcing 

 privacy 

 public-sector 

 retail 

 security 

 skills 

 software 

 strategy 

Advertisement

 newsletter signup 

 existing users 

Newsletter signup

Sign up for our range of FREE newsletters:

 Essential weekly news 

 Technology Insider 

 Financial services news 

 Public sector news 

 Retail & supply chain news 

More available - click 'submit' to view

Existing User

 Newsletter user login: 

Advertisement

Jobs

 Jobs 

Related jobs

Job of the week

 Web Services Manager, London, 44,076k plus benefits 

Universities UK (UUK) is looking for a Web Services Manager for a new role to take responsibility for the development of our communication tools, built on the SharePoint platform. 

> More IT vacancies 

Job alerts

Latest jobs to your inbox

Find your next job

 Search: 

 Search: 

IT Salary Checker

Are you being paid what you are worth?

Advertisement

White papers

 white papers 

 Search white papers 
 Search: 

Top categories

 VPN, Extranet and Intranet Solutions 

 WAN/ LAN Solutions 

 Network Security 

 Interoperability-Connectivity 

 Grid/ Utility Computing 

 poll 

 audio / video 

 in-depth 

Latest poll

 Is Google likely to be a genuine alternative to Microsoft for enterprise IT? 
 Is Google likely to be a genuine alternative to Microsoft for enterprise IT? 
Tell us what you think about Google vs Microsoft

 Yes: Microsoft is living in the past 

 Maybe: Google’s products need to mature more first 

 No: Microsoft is the software leader and will stay that way 

 View poll results 

> More polls 

Latest audio and video articles

 Video 
 How to make the move to cloud computing with virtualisation 

A panel of experts examine the role of virtualisation in today’s IT strategies 08 Jun 2009 

 Video 
 How Silicon Valley is surviving the recession 

In the heart of the IT industry, there is still plenty of optimism about how technology will beat the downturn 05 Jun 2009 

> More audio and video 

Latest in-depth articles

 Analysis 
 Taking the horror out of SOA 

Widely misunderstood and wilfully abused, the term “service-oriented architecture” fills many IT leaders with dread, but behind the monstrous hype are some frightfully sound principles. So how should organisations go about putting them into practice? Computing asked leading experts for their views 16 Jun 2009 

 Analysis 
 Five tips on implementing a new IT architecture 

Architectures should be based on business capabilities 16 Jun 2009 

> More in depth articles 

Advertisement

Primary Navigation

 Home 

 Hardware 

 Software 

 Communications 

 Internet 

 Security 

 Management 

 Public sector 

 Mobile 

 RSS 

Secondary navigation

 © Incisive Media Ltd. 2009 Incisive Media Limited, Haymarket House, 28-29 Haymarket, London SW1Y 4RX, is a company registered in England and Wales with company registration number 04038503

 Search computing.co.uk 

 Keywords: 

Site credentials:

 About computing.co.uk / Contacts 

 About Incisive Media 

 Privacy policy 

 Terms and conditions 

 Accessibility 

 Sitemap 

Related Incisive Media
web sites:

 News and reviews for IT professionals 

 News for IT staff and technologists 

 Green business news 

 News for the IT channel 

Jobs:

 Computing Careers 

 IT jobs 

 Programmer jobs 

 Developer jobs 

 IT manager jobs 

 Project manager jobs 

 SAP jobs 

 Oracle Jobs 

 Java Jobs 

 IT recruitment agency directory 

 Software engineer jobs 

 Inquirer Jobs 

 Firmware developer jobs 

 Electronics engineer jobs 

Article types:

 News 

 In-depth 

 Reviews 

 Audio and video 

 Events 

 Computing Business 

Technology categories:

 Appliances 

 Applications 

 Bugs and fixes 

 Chips and components 

 Client 

 Communications 

 Developer 

 Ecommerce 

 Employment and skills 

 Enterprise security technology 

 Finance and Reporting 

 Hacking 

 IT Management 

 IT Services and Outsourcing 

 Licensing and piracy 

 Mobile 

 Network infrastructure 

 Open source 

 Operating systems 

 Peripherals 

 Portable 

 Privacy and data 

 Public sector 

 Security 

 Server 

 Services and outsourcing 

 Storage 

 Telecoms 

 Voice and Data 

 Wireless networking