
Microsoft Rolls Out Media Center
Peter Glaskowsky - Editor-in-Chief, MPR  {07/29/2002} 

Microsoft has announced a new version of its Windows 
XP operating system that will be sold only with 
systems made by selected OEMs. The new Windows XP 
Media Center Edition combines a number of unique 
features aimed at living-room PCs, including some 
previously sold as part of Microsoft's UltimateTV 
platform. The new Media Center systems will include an 
infrared remote control designed to work with a 
simplified Windows user interface, a TV tuner, and a 
hardware video encoder to enable hard-disk-based video 
recording and playback. The combination of these 
elements was first shown in a keynote by Microsoft's 
chairman Bill Gates at the Consumer Electronics Show 
in January, where it went by the code-name 
"Freestyle."

The TV tuner required for Media Center systems can be 
designed for terrestrial broadcast, cable, or 
satellite TV systems - or some combination of these. 
With a hardware-based video encoder, television 
programs can be compressed to just a few megabits per 
second, enabling these PCs to store hundreds of hours 
of programming. Microsoft has adapted some of the 
user-interface concepts from UltimateTV, to create a 
simplified Windows desktop that presents just a few 
options at a time - for example, a list of stored TV 
programs, or MP3-encoded songs, or digital photos.

Three OEMs - HP, NEC, and Samsung - participated in 
the Media Center launch. Media Center PCs will reach 
the market in time for the Christmas season. This 
isn't the first attempt to get PCs into the living 
room, but it seems to be the strongest push to date.

Windows is far from the ideal platform for this sort 
of work, being vulnerable to task-scheduling conflicts 
that can leave critical interrupts unserviced for 
seconds at a time. However, the Windows XP Media 
Center Edition may be adequate for its intended 
purpose, as long as customers can be trained to avoid 
installing too many aftermarket applications and 
peripherals. 

If the Media Center project fails to deliver the 
reliability of competing solutions from SonicBlue and 
TiVo, it may be years before the PC is invited back 
into the living room.

