System saves $ for thrifty night owls
CAMBRIDGE, MA — Consumers may
soon play a greater role in determining
what they pay for electrical power.
The reason? Increased use by utility
companies of time-of-day rates, which,
like those used by phone companies,
charge more during the day when usage is
high than at night.
Time-of-day rates will enable con­
sumers to save money by putting off ac­
tivities, such as using washing machines,
driers and water heaters, until evenings or
weekends.
“A small life-style change may be nec­
essary to benefit from time-of-day rating
but we feel that people will make that
change, because it will reduce their elec­
trical costs,” said Ralph Abbott, VP of
American Science & Engineering, here.
AS&E developed a two-way communica­
tions system — ASEP — that allows utili­
ty companies to implement time-of-day
rates. The system is controlled by a Data
General Eclipse S-230 minicomputer with
256K core memory.
Utilities in about 12 states now use such
systems on experimental bases, and the
Department of Energy estimates that most
states will be using time-of-day rates with­
in five or six years.
“Time-of-day rating is gaining in­
creased acceptance because it benefits the
consumer, allows the utility company to
level off the power it must generate and,
because it reduces the amount of oil
needed to provide that power, it also aids
our national goal of energy conservation,”
said Dr. Martin Annis, president of
AS&E.
One of the first utilities to use the ASEP
systems for time-of-day metering, the
Florida Power Corp., will soon begin test­
ing a dynamic rate system that will charge
customers peak rates only when peak
levels are actually reached. The ASEP sys­
tem allows individual meter usage to be
checked as often as every 30 minutes or as
infrequently as once each month.
Because it is a two-way system, ASEP
prevents electrical brownouts and black­
outs and it operates over powerlines, a
communications medium already in place.
“If electrical usage reaches dangerous
levels,” said Abbott, “the system is ca­
pable of turning off blocks of non-essential
electrical loads. By doing this a major
problem could be averted, with customers
suffering only a minor inconvenience.”
Florida Power and the Florida Power
and Light Co. also plan to use the system
to control residential air conditioning and
heating systems and electrical water heat­
ers. Wisconsin Electric Power uses ASEP
to control water heaters in 154,000 homes
in addition to remotely metering certain
customers. Utility companies in Missouri,
New Jersey. Minnesota and California
have also implemented the system.
^**"^——*—•*.......... ’ 1 ■"
.................... ”
