===== dors-1996-page.txt =====
 window.RufflePlayer=window.RufflePlayer||{};window.RufflePlayer.config={"autoplay":"on","unmuteOverlay":"hidden","showSwfDownload":true}; __wm.init("https://web.archive.org/web"); __wm.wombat("http://www.aberdeen.com:80/dors.htm","19961023153003","https://web.archive.org/","web","https://web-static.archive.org/_static/", "846084603"); THE DISTRIBUTED, OPEN RELATIONAL DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS BUYING GUIDE: 1996 EDITION THE DISTRIBUTED, OPEN RELATIONAL DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS BUYING GUIDE: 1996 EDITION The Distributed, Open Relational Database Management Systems (DORS) Buying Guide is designed to help IS buyers, information and technology executives, and current and potential DORS suppliers understand and evaluate the current DORS marketplace. The ongoing evolution of enterprise-serving data continues to shift corporate data management requirements. The trend is clearly toward distributed data access (e.g., Internet access to multiple back-end databases), and the products that facilitate it. The Distributed, Open Relational Database Management Systems Buying Guide looks at this shift in technology and approach, and in the changing nature of the products that implement them. The DORS Buying Guide objectively analyzes evolving DORS technologies and the companies creating them. It evaluates both the completeness of each company's product offering in each of five primary product categories, and the strength and stability of the underlying technologies. WHAT'S INSIDE In the DORS Buying Guide , Aberdeen defines, classifies and details available products that provide these five key technologies: Scalability , to meet the demands of end user enterprises. Distributed Technology , to match the growing decentralization of data. Open Technology , to interoperate within multiplatform and multivendor environments. Toolkits , to increase programmer productivity. Next-Generation Technology , to handle Internet/Intranets,.relational OLAP, universal servers, and workgroup servers. DORS BENEFITS The Distributed, Open Relational Database Management Systems Buying Guide covers the important buying criteria and evaluates the benefits of eight leading suppliers and their systems. The ideal DORS should deliver a huge benefit set that includes: Corporate Standards Implementation Data Extensibility Decreased IS Labor Costs Enterprise Strategy Support Increased Programmer Productivity Interoperability Legacy System Support Application Portability Network Support Scalability Technological Adaptability In the buying guide you will learn where DORS fall short in providing these benefits; the significant benefits they deliver right now; and the areas users and suppliers should expect to see grow in prominence in the near future. KEY BENEFITS WE HIGHLIGHT The DORS Buying Guide suggests that these characteristics comprise the key benefits of DORSs: Improved performance. Increased data-processing robustness. Lower-cost configuration flexibility. Improved scalability curve, for either processors or storage devices. For each DORS supplier, we ask: For what enterprise situations or needs should you consider buying the supplier's DORS product? How attractive is the supplier in overall technology, marketing and strategy? What are the product's and the supplier's long-term goals and prospects? ISSUES WE ADDRESS The DORS Buying Guide probes critical technical and business considerations surrounding the move to distributed data management. Here's just a partial list: Aberdeen's vision of the ideal DORS for each of the five core technologies. The growing trend to access decision-support data and optionally "post" the decisions via OLTP. The need for twenty-four-hour, seven-day-a-week reliability. The critical importance of recovery capabilities. Specific benchmark recommendations. Specific recommendations to turn a single DBMS into an ideal DORS. The four key product categories against which we evaluate each supplier's product offerings. WHO'S INCLUDED Suppliers profiled in this edition of the DORS Buying Guide are: Computer Associates International, Inc. IBM Corporation Informix Software, Inc. Microsoft Corporation Oracle Corporation Progress Software Corporation Software AG Sybase, Inc. CLICK HERE TO ORDER Aberdeen Group , Inc. One Boston Place Boston, Massachusetts 02108 USA Contact: Susan Rinehart Voice: (617)854-5212 Fax: (617)723-7897 Email: rinehart@aberdeen.com 