SOURCE_URL: http://www.technewsworld.com/story/32785.html
MIME: text/html

Technology News: Future Tech: Microsoft Launches 64-Bit Windows XP Beta E-BUSINESS | TECHNOLOGY | CLASSIFIEDS [NEW] | CRM | LINUX | MAC | ECTNEWS.COM Welcome | Sign In Future Tech Technology Future Tech Biometrics Nanotech Robotics Gaming Green Tech Home Tech Home Entertainment Home Networks Media Convergence Reviews Science Med Tech Space Tech Buzz Computing Data Management Data Center Data Storage Disaster Recovery Hardware Chips Personal Computers Servers Software Open Source Operating Systems Virtualization Mobile Tech GPS Handheld Devices RFID WiFi Hotspot Locator Wireless Networking Internet P2P Tech Search Tech Web 2.0 Blogosphere Podcasting Social Networking Video 2.0 Wikis Web Apps Security Cyberattacks Exploits & Vulnerabilities Encryption Malware Network Intrusion Privacy IT Management Core Services Communication Systems Tech Support User Access Development Tools & Processes Workflow Management IT Leadership CIO Tech Pathfinders Sysadmin Implementation IT Maintenance Reader Services Account Management Become an Affiliate Discussion Free Classifieds News Alerts Newsletters RSS / Headline Feeds Site Maps ECT News Network Map CRM Buyer Site Map E-Commerce Times Site Map LinuxInsider Site Map MacNewsWorld Site Map TechNewsWorld Site Map Search ECT News Network | Tech Blog DISCUSSION | NEWSLETTERS | ACCOUNT MGMT --> June 16, 2009 01:41:51 PM TechNewsWorld > Technology > Future Tech | Read Next Article in Future Tech Please note that this material is copyright protected. It is illegal to display or reproduce this article without permission for any commercial purpose, including use as marketing or public relations literature. To obtain reprints of this article for authorized use, please call a sales representative at (818) 461-9700 or visit http://www.ectnews.com/about/reprints/ . Microsoft Launches 64-Bit Windows XP Beta Print Version E-Mail Article Reprints By Jay Lyman TechNewsWorld 02/05/04 10:24 AM PT Analysts agreed that demand for AMD's 64-bit Opteron and Athlon 64 is rooted less in a desire for 64-bit computing and more in demand for the chipmaker's latest processors. "It's not so much 64-bit as it is AMD's next-generation chip -- which is better, faster and more efficient," Gartner research vice president Martin Reynolds told TechNewsWorld. Crystal Reports - New Royalty-Free Runtime and Free 30-Day Trial Download . Check out the new simplified licensing option that enables unlimited royalty-free distribution of the report engine for externally facing server and web deployment. Learn more . Diverging from its usual dedication to Intel-based machines, Microsoft (Nasdaq: MSFT) has made public a beta version of Windows XP for use on 64-bit computers running the AMD (NYSE: AMD) Athlon 64 and Opteron processors. Microsoft said its Windows XP 64-Bit Edition is designed for technical workstation users who require large amounts of memory and floating point performance in areas such as mechanical design , digital content creation and high-performance computing. However, analysts downplayed demand for the operating system, pointing to the small number of 64-bit computers and even smaller number of applications that can run in 64-bit mode. "Let's say I have a 64-bit operating system; I have to run all of the applications like Photoshop and even Word in 32-bit," Aberdeen Group chief research officer Peter Kastner told TechNewsWorld. "Windows XP 64-bit will not be helpful for customers unless the most popular applications are available." Not Ready for Prime Time Microsoft said the beta 64-bit version of XP, available on a CD-ROM or as a 450-MB download from the software giant's site, provides an early preview of its next-generation Windows XP 64-bit operating system while the software is still being developed. The company, which said fee-based support for the OS will be available with the final release, stressed that the software is intended for testing and evaluation only. "This is an opportunity for you to begin evaluating Windows XP 64-Bit Edition for 64-bit extended systems for your individual business needs and ensuring that your applications will be ready for the commercial release of the product," Microsoft said on its Web site. "It should not be used for production purposes, and should not be placed in a production environment." Kastner said that with the limited number of 64-bit computers on the market and a production version of the 64-bit OS not expected until the end of this year, Microsoft is unlikely to draw many early testers to the beta version of the software. Looking to Longhorn Microsoft is looking to keep up with rival 64-bit Linux operating systems and lay the groundwork for its next-generation Windows OS, known as Longhorn, according to Kastner. "Microsoft is doing this because they think they'll need the code base in the Longhorn time frame, which is two to three years out," he said. Microsoft established a private newsgroup for discussing technical issues surrounding the 64-bit OS and said the prerelease software is time-limited to expire in 360 days. Waiting on Intel Microsoft highlighted that the 64-bit edition is only compatible with computers running 64-bit AMD Opteron or Athlon 64 processors and cannot be installed on 64-bit Intel (Nasdaq: INTC) Itanium-based systems. Kastner, who said there are only about 100,000 Intel Itanium 64-bit machines on the market, indicated 64-bit computing will not be truly significant for users nor for Microsoft until Intel commits more wholeheartedly to 64-bit computing. "Very few consumer desktops can take advantage of 64-bit," Kastner said. "Intel has to drop the other shoe and deem that the broad, mass market for consumers is ready for 64-bit. I predict that will not be this year." 64-Bit Demand Analysts agreed that demand for AMD's 64-bit Opteron and Athlon 64 is rooted less in a desire for 64-bit computing and more for the chipmaker's latest processors. "It's not so much 64-bit as it is AMD's next-generation chip -- which is better, faster and more efficient," Gartner (NYSE: IT) research vice president Martin Reynolds told TechNewsWorld. Kastner said AMD is selling a lot of its Athlon 64 chips because they are good 32-bit performers. The analyst also indicated that AMD fans are not likely to be chomping at the bit for Microsoft's 64-bit OS. "I'd say that, as a group, AMD customers are more concerned about the late delivery of Unreal Tournament 2004 than they are waiting like Godot for Windows XP 64," Kastner said. Social Networking Toolbox: ShareThis Next Article in Future Tech: Intel Rethinks 64-Bit Strategy for Desktop-Grade Processors Talkback: Join the Discussion. Re: Microsoft Launches 64-Bit Windows XP Beta jletennier Posted 2004-02-29 Hello ... Print Version E-Mail Article Reprints More by Jay Lyman Related Stories Intel Releases New Pentium 4 Processors, Code-Named 'Prescott' (02-Feb-04) Intel Rethinks 64-Bit Strategy for Desktop-Grade Processors (30-Jan-04) SGI Launches Initiative To Improve Linux Visualization (21-Jan-04) Apple SVP Jon Rubinstein on the Reinvention of Hardware (19-Jan-04) HP's Linux Sales Reach $2.5 Billion in 2003 (16-Jan-04) Related News Alerts Microsoft Activate Alert | Search Archives AMD Activate Alert | Search Archives Intel Activate Alert | Search Archives Gartner Activate Alert | Search Archives More Stories by Jay Lyman Open Source Developer Dumps Novell Over Microsoft Deal (26-Dec-06) Financial Firms Tap Microsoft for Linux (22-Dec-06) Mozilla Beefs Up Security in Firefox 2.0 (21-Dec-06) [Search More...] Don't miss a story -- sign up for our FREE e-mail newsletters and view the latest headlines at a glance. Tech News Flash [ View Sample ] E-Commerce Minute [ View Sample ] ECT News Network Weekly Newsletter [ View Sample ] Check Out TechNewsWorld's Free Classifieds! Shortcuts Get Business and Technology News Alerts Most Popular | Spotlight Features | Exclusives This Week on ECT News Network | Podcasts WiFi Hotspot Locator Inside TechNewsWorld Free White Papers Managing a Service-Driven Data Center Bringing Requirements to Life to Drive Collaboration and Agreement Symark PowerBroker: Root Access Risk Control for the Enterprise WebSphere Application Server Express - complimentary trial Webinar: Managing Laptops Outside the Office TechNewsWorld Beware of the Information Security Inertia Syndrome Survey: As Web Use Climbs, Family Time Slips Playing a Hunch: Social Decision-Making Site Carves Out New Niche in Search China Scrambles to Repair Crumbling Green Dam Samsung Takes Wraps Off New Omnia Smartphone Lineup The Rise and Fall of Traditional Journalism, Part 5 Apple Pounds Palm, Sets Sights on Redmond Is Online Learning a Solution for Cash-Strapped California Schools? Using GPS Phones to Track Virtual Infections - and Real Epidemics Facebook Members to Become Masters of Their Domain Names E-Commerce Times The Multichannel E-Commerce Path Out of the Recession Jammie Thomas, RIAA Go At It Again IBM Offers Platform for Diving Into the Cloud IT Needs a New Drug Citrix Online Brings SMBs Into the Virtual Meeting Room MacNewsWorld Virgin Serves Up MP3 Buffet Glad Works Makes Marketing Moves Through iPhone Apps Safari 4 Goes to Eleven WWDC: iPhone Invigorated, Snow Leopard Spruced, AT&T Tarnished Should You Spring for an iPhone 3GS? CRM Buyer Administration Mulls Financial Services Industry Makeover GE Aims to Jump-Start EMR Adoption With No-Interest Loans Turning 'Interesting Moments' Into Sales: Q&A With Marketo CEO Phil Fernandez Chrysler Customers' Shrinking Service Options Safeguarding the Crown Jewels With Online Brand Monitoring LinuxInsider EnterpriseDB Smooths Way for Oracle App Migration Trolls and Astroturfers and Shills, Oh My! Yahoo's Hadoop to Run Free in the Wild Leeches or Users? Should Enterprise IT Have to Give Back to FOSS? 'MobMovs' Give New Meaning to 'Community' Theater Sponsored Links Avaya Aura (TM) A new era in communications. Explore>> Think your data is safe? Register for a free assessment. Or get our ebook now. trendmicro.com/thinkagain Free White Paper Learn how to drive consumer engagement with entertainment metadata. Inside TechNewsWorld CIO A Voice for Tech: Carly Fiorina's Political Ambitions The iPhone 3G and the Risk of Great Marketing Bhaskar Rao: Conquering Space and Time With MIMO Computing Picking Up the Pieces After Downsizing: Avoid Orphaned Data Skyfire Lets Fly With Speedier Mobile Browser Is Windows App Envy a Thing of the Past? Data Management HP Gives Scale-Out Architecture Extreme Makeover Bite the Bullet and Throw Away Your Data EMC's Data Domain Bid Puts NetApp in Tough Spot, Says Analyst ECT News Exclusives Keeping Credit Card Numbers Well-Cloaked: Q&A With Fingerhut's Mark Lieberg Outsource or Keep It Home? Have It Your Way: Q&A With Alpine Access CEO Chris Carrington Riding Out the Storm: Q&A With Information Builders CEO Gerry Cohen Future Tech The Blood and Guts of Biometric Systems Robots and the Law: Will the Real Inventor Please Stand Up? The Networked Garden: MIT Undergrads Build Robo-Farmers Green Tech Utility Companies Plug In to Google PowerMeter Study Sees Eco-Threat in Power-Guzzling Gadgets Xerox Goes for the Green With Crayon-Like Printer Ink Hardware The Asus EeeTop: A Nettop in Search of a Mission Snow Leopard to Claw at Enterprise Front Doors Apple Launches Speedy New iPhone, Cuts a Bunch of Prices Internet Spain's Music Piracy Battle: Is Building the Ship as Bad as Plundering the Booty? EC Scoffs at Microsoft's Offer to Ship Browser-Free OS The Rise and Fall of Traditional Journalism, Part 4 IT Management Apple Primed for iPhone Song-and-Dance Extravaganza Google Lobbyist Unfit for Deputy CTO Job, Say Critics Mobile Development and Multiplicity Madness Mobile Tech Clampdown Week: iPhone vs. Pre, China vs. Web, FTC vs. Worst ISP Ever The TV Studio in Your Hand: The Future of News Gathering Former iPod Guru Takes Palm's Helm Must Read It's Time to Push Back Against Twitter Backlash How Apple Made Windows 7 Better Portable Ubuntu, Windows Live Together in Perfect Harmony Open Source The US Army: It's Better with Vista? Openness, Linux and Mobile Innovation Acer Greases Android for Netbook Duty Science Endeavour Visitors to Make Record-Setting ISS Crowd Computer Accident Study Highlights Hazards of Home Office NASA May Buddy Up With Europe on Road to Mars Security LOL, I'm on Vacay, Rob Me! New App Aims to Plug Holes in Leaky Enterprise Data Hulls China's New PC Policy Injects Big Brother With Steroids Software Fedora Sets Leonidas Loose, Builds Collaboration Portal Natal Drops Jaws, Nvidia Shines, Pre Sets New Bar The Mainframe Bridge to the Cloud Spotlight Features Toiling Away in 'White-Collar Sweatshops' - aka Call Centers Windows XP: The Legacy Lives On Taking a Shine to iPhone in the Enterprise Tech Buzz Microsoft Goes Bing, Palm's Pwned A Clarion Call for Expanding E-Commerce Google Is the Sarah Palin of Enterprise Vendors Web 2.0 TwitterFon Pro: Tweet Harder, Tweet Smarter Blerp Refocuses the Web Through Comment-Colored Glasses Surviving the Downturn Through Social Marketing ECT News Network Information Publications E-Commerce Times TechNewsWorld LinuxInsider CRM Buyer MacNewsWorld Free Newsletters E-Commerce Minute Tech News Flash ECT News Network Weekly Newsletter Newsletter Sign Up Reader Services Account Management Become an Affiliate Discussion Free Classifieds Linking Policy Network Map News Alerts RSS / Headline Feeds Search ECT News Network Locate Products and Services E-Business Info Center IT Resources Open Source Technology CRM Solutions Center --> Corporate About Careers Contact Us Business Development Permissions Reprint Information How To Advertise Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | How To Advertise Copyright 1998-2009 ECT News Network, Inc. All Rights Reserved.