 Report on Aberdeen Group Research into new Category for MaXLine

Executive Summary
A few months ago I commissioned the Aberdeen Group to research a sample of Fortune 1000 companies, government agencies and industry leaders to determine if there is interest in defining the storage of fixed content as a new category of storage.  The objective would be to create an industry wave and position MaXLine as the principal brand.  

I chose Aberdeen because they have successfully identified and launched categories in the hardware and software industries.  Their association with Siebel coining Customer Relationship Management (CRM) and positioning their clients as the category leader brought Siebel a $2B revenue stream before any other company was able to field a competitive application in CRM.  Aberdeen is a respected research company that actively participates in setting Enterprise data-center strategies for Fortune 500 companies. 

Aberdeen's research is intended to determine the industry's understanding of fixed content, if the industry would consider storing fixed content onto hard disk drives and what issues or applications would be the primary driver for creating a category for MaXLine.  

Aberdeen interviewed 70 companies including Mellon Bank, Ingersoll Rand, Shell, Verizon, Wells Fargo, MetLife, and Fidelity Investments.  

The companies were principally in the banking, finance and insurance industries.  I requested that mix since these are the industries with the greatest adoption of SAN networks, the largest 
Ninety-percent of the respondents reported to their company's CEO or CFO.  This was a requirement of the research insuring that we had "strategic" thinkers responsible for both the operations and the economics of their company's data centers.

The sample had a bias to larger companies.  Half of the sample has revenues over $1B but a number of smaller companies and small divisions of large corporations were included in the survey.

 One of the most revealing finding is the planned growth of storage in the enterprise.  In all three categories of operations, at least 40% of the respondents expected to increase their storage requirements.  Storage growth may not be a fast as projected a few years ago but is must continue to grow as long as there is growth in worldwide economies.  

The Aberdeen report identifies important elements to creating a new industry category.  
    - First, most companies surveyed storage systems are 50% to 60% filled.  They plan to expand storage when their systems reach 80%.  That means we have the runway to develop a category as enterprise customers are considering their next major storage expansion.
    - The research indicated a "bi-polar" response to questions to understand if the sample companies understood that there was data that was used less often.  This is a key indicator for an opportunity to use one part of a community to advance a concept or category to another.  It gives us the opportunity to publicize thought-leadership and advance an industry discussion to drive an industry conclusion.  It gives research firms an opportunity to promote ideas and usually leads to the industry self-creating opportunities for a new category.
    - A majority of the sample indicated that they have content that is non-changing or "fixed-content."  Considering the new HIPPA and SEC regulations under consideration (both require real-time access to data), it is likely that US enterprises will be required to create fixed-content data warehouses.  
    - There are multiple issues that we can leverage to create a category.  Besides the economy of storing fixed-content on MaXLine drives, it is clear that more efficient pre-staging or "Near-line" backup systems are needed.  Backup is still limited by restore times taking too long and by backup windows begin too short.   The Mid-Line category of HDDs can resolve both issues with the help of better Mid-Line Software

This is an opportunity to create a category.  Companies will be reviewing the data requirements, there will be government regulations that will require a change in policies, there will be industry debate creating a battlefield for creating a category and there are multiple problems that the category can resolve.  With clear Maxtor position, a vocal customer advocate, a leading research company and the support of system vendors Maxtor can lead the creation of the Midline category and position MaXLine as the principal brand of choice. 

Here are my next steps

    1. I will invite Aberdeen to present their commissioned research and their plans for their own white papers in this area to the team in Shrewsbury and will ask that Robert Wise also attend.  The goal will be to develop a seamless, communication on the adoption of Midline-storage, as a way to better organize storage centers - not as a replacement for on-line transactional storage.  I have no interest in shrinking the SCSI TAM - I believe that creating a Mid-line category will create new opportunities, position Maxtor as a Market Maker and position MaXLine and Atlas as "co-operative enterprise brands."

    2. I will ask Joe's and Robert's teams to consider the research and work with me to develop a connected communication strategy for Atlas and MaXLine leveraging the categories of on-line and mid-line enterprise storage.  This communication will address issues about when to use which drives (at least our recommendation - an issue for which everyone knows that I have concerns but am willing to consider on this point) 
    3. The MaXLine and Atlas brand teams will create a "Category Strategy Plan" to promote MaXLine and Mid-Line Storage.  This will include publicity, speaking opportunities, customer leverage and analyst promotion.  Our goal will be to position MaXLine as the principal brand in Mid-Line storage.
