Digital's VAX: Alive and Kicking With TPC Benchmarks

Executive Summary
Digital on March 15, 1992 quietly made a significant across-the-board price-performance realignment. As a result of this action:
- The VAX product line has been rationalized and squeezed into a narrow price-performance. Buyers pay within 20% from the entry-level MicroVAX 3100 through the mainframe-class VAX 6000 model 640.
- The MicroVAX 3100 model 80 today has the industry's best price-performance as measured by the industry-standard TPC-A benchmarks.
- Since August of 1990, Digital has improved TPC-A throughput (performance) by about 50% while costs-per-transaction (price-performance) improved three-fold.
- The MicroVAX and VAX 6000 product lines are highly competitive with not only traditional rivals Hewlett-Packard and IBM, but also with hot-box suppliers such as Sequent.

Aberdeen's conclusion is that Digital has deliberately moved to make the VAX a commercial computing price-performance leader across the board. Buyers can expect the best price-performance they have ever seen from Digital.

One Price Fits All
Digital's new price-performance message is, essentially, "one price-performance fits all." Price-performance ranges from a low of $7.69 K$/TPS-A on the MicroVAX 3100 to a high of $10.71 for the MicroVAX 4000 model 300.

IBM's AS/400 price-performance is 77% more expensive with the high-end model E70 than at the entry-level E10.

Rationalizing Price-Performance
Digital's actions rationalize VAX pricing across three areas:
- MicroVAX price-performance is within 20 percent of the mainframe-class VAX 6000-640;
- VAXcluster capability has no significant price-performance cost, yet provides higher availability and investment protection;
- Symmetric multiprocessor price-performance actually improves between the uniprocessor VAX 6000-610 and the four-way 640.

Performance Improvements
As to performance, the VAX 6000-640 shows more than seven times the throughput (over 200 TPS-A) of 1988's top-of-the-line VAX 8830 (at 27 TPS running Debit/Credit, not TPC-A). Digital has done an excellent job in improving its VAX hardware as well as the efficiency of Rdb/VMS software in handling large transaction and large user volumes.

The MicroVAX 4000-300 experienced: reduced disk prices (24%); reduced memory prices (25%); 32MB less memory required; 25% service prepayment discount; lower terminal and terminal server prices. Over 20 months, Digital reduced prices three times and increased performance once (by 50%). The result is a threefold improvement in price-performance from K$31.90/TPS-A to K$10.71/TPS-A.

How Digital Did It
The VAX performance improvement came from new efficiencies in VMS and Rdb, Digital's relational database. Software performance improvements essentially add capacity to existing sunk-cost hardware. They are the equivalent of a free midlife hardware kicker.

Digital Wants You to Buy Now
While at least part of the market is fixated on next year's Alpha RISC products, Digital has to sell the VAX systems available today. Digital is not just holding a VAX fire sale. The company is offering VAX buyers the best price-performance and the best performance ever available from Digital.

Conclusions
Digital is not (yet) prepared to concede that the CISC-based VAX with a proprietary operating system (VAX VMS) is ready for the Computer Museum. Rather than letting the VAX fade away, the company is aggressively reducing costs while improving performance.

Price-performance is seldom at the top of buyer's acquisition priorities. Aberdeen's conclusion on Digital's TPC-A benchmark message is that the company believes in all the virtues that VAX has always had, but with the icing on the cake of industry-leading price-performance.

Digital is serious about keeping the VAX product line both a leader and a winner.
