URL: http://www.ph.ucla.edu/epi/bioter/tightendistrack.html

Tighten Disease Tracking 

 TIGHTEN DISEASE TRACKING 

 Last Updated 

 02 Apr 2003 

 Source: 

 Los Angeles Times , April 
2, 2003 

 EDITORIAL 

 Tighten Disease Tracking 

The tarmac drama Tuesday at San Jose 
International Airport was a false alarm, but it pointed up the weaknesses and 
confusion of public health responses to severe acute respiratory syndrome, or 
SARS. After five people complained during a flight from Tokyo of flu-like 
symptoms, the other passengers were held for two tense hours on the ground, then 
released with warning leaflets. Three of the five were taken to an emergency 
room and then allowed to leave; two were examined at the scene. The cases were 
not SARS, doctors decided.

Since emerging in China five months ago, 
the mysterious illness has spread to at least 1,804 people in 17 countries, 
killing up to 62. California has had 20 suspected cases and no deaths.

In Canada, where 129 probable and 
suspected cases have been reported, six of them fatal, health officials 
quarantined about 46 people in Vancouver after they were exposed to people with 
the illness. The most severe precautions were taken in Asia, with Singapore 
shutting down its largest college, Taiwan barring ships from the mainland from 
docking and Hong Kong officials threatening to send to a government quarantine 
camp hundreds of residents in a 33-story apartment building where the infection 
appeared.

Public health officials took wildly 
varying levels of action -- from release with a warning card to full quarantine 
-- because there is no medical consensus on how to prevent the spread of the 
disease, or even on how it spreads. But it is clear that public health officials 
would be on surer footing today if Chinese officials had been honest and 
forthright in reporting the disease when it first appeared in the southern 
province of Guandong at least five months ago.

Even now, China is not fulfilling a 
promise to provide the World Health Organization with daily provincial reports 
on progress of the disease. SARS is characterized by a sudden onset of fever of 
more than 100.4 degrees, coughing, muscle aches and chills but, unlike the 
common flu, not a runny nose.

Individual nations should give WHO as much 
high-powered assistance as possible. In the United States, Secretary of State 
Colin L. Powell and Treasury Secretary John W. Snow should, for instance, insist 
that nations trading with the U.S. report infectious disease outbreaks.

Why the Treasury secretary? Because the 
illness has forced U.S. companies big and small to alter their business plans. 
Firms in many cases have canceled all travel to Asia. Peter Kastner, chief 
research officer of Boston-based Aberdeen Group, predicts that if the disease is 
not brought under control soon, the manufacturing of Chinese products from 
electronics to Christmas toys may be severely affected. Already, chip maker 
Intel and computer maker Hewlett-Packard have closed their Hong Kong offices.

 It is hard to imagine that bioterrorism 
could be countered until the containment of diseases like SARS is mastered. The 
leaders of the wealthy nations need to wake to the public health dangers that 
accompany international travel and global trade.