Aberdeen Advisory Service
An interactive advisory service is at the core of Aberdeen’s service offerings.  This gives a client direct access to a highly experienced analyst who understands that client’s technology and market.  The relationship generally becomes the foundation for all other Aberdeen consulting services. 
Ad Hoc Access to Analysts
The value of the Aberdeen Advisory Service is the ad hoc access to our market-research analyst-experts, so that the day-to-day “what about?” questions can be asked and answered — allowing the timely, market-influencing response by your organization so necessary in today’s tough and fast-moving markets.  It is too difficult in complex markets to get the right answers for your organization without completely understanding what changes will mean and why.  The ability to tap an IT industry analyst for an answer focused on your organization’s needs is invaluable.  
Relationship-Building for Your Success
Since 1987, Aberdeen Group has approached the IT research market with a business model that stresses building a close, one-on-one relationship with an expert industry analyst-consultant.  Our success shows that our approach pays off in huge dividends to our clients personally and to their firms.
What We Deliver to Our Clients
The ongoing Aberdeen Advisory Service is no additional charge to active clients for the ad hoc access and research made available to advisory service clients.  The service consists of:
    • A designated analyst 
    • Interactive briefing
    • PR and Press Interaction
    • Trade show access
    • Research publications
Your Own Analyst
You will be assigned one of our experienced research analysts, who will be the relationship manager.  The analyst will be in a research coverage area which covers your primary IT market.
Interactive Briefing
Aberdeen Group will hold a one- to two-hour briefing with your company.  The purpose is to provide you with Aberdeen’s latest research findings in the your technology market and discuss their relevance to your company.  
Telephone and Email Access
Reasonable telephone or email access is provided to your designated Aberdeen Group analyst for you and another contact at your company.
Public Relations and Press Interaction 
Aberdeen Group will make itself available as a creditable third-party source to assist your public relations and press release efforts with appropriate objective quotes and background press briefings.
Trade Show Access
Aberdeen Group will meet privately with clients to share observations and perspectives at all relevant trade shows that your Aberdeen analyst attends.  Typically, your analyst would walk the show floor with you and discuss the competition’s trade-show positioning as well as any hot new entrants.
Aberdeen Research Access
You will have access through a portal at Aberdeen.com to the published research and analysis of your primary IT market. This research forms the basis for our intellectual discussions about your company on market dynamics, trends, and competition.
Aberdeen Group Services
Aberdeen Group offers a wide variety of consulting services to technology suppliers, users, and investors.  These services can be customized and packaged to meet specific client requirements, budgets, and timeframes.  Our capabilities include:
    • Primary market research — qualitative and quantitative market research data on eighteen emerging technology markets, including custom strategy validation projects.
    • Consulting services — a variety of consulting services that help clients position their companies and products for success.
    • Audience education and training — amplifying a client’s positioning and unique value proposition through sales force and channel partner training, speeches, and publications aimed at a variety of audiences.
