AberdeenGroup

AAS

Aberdeen Advisory Service
An interactive advisory service is at the core of Aberdeen’s service offerings. This gives
a client direct access to a highly experienced analyst who understands that client’s
technology and market. The relationship generally becomes the foundation for all
other Aberdeen consulting services.

You will have access through
a portal at Aberdeen.com to
the published research and
analysis of your primary IT
market. This research forms
the basis for our intellectual
discussions about your company on market dynamics,
trends, and competition.

You will be assigned one of our experienced research analysts, who will be the
relationship manager. The analyst will be
in a research coverage area which covers
your primary IT market.

Aberdeen Group will hold a
one- to two-hour briefing with
your company. The purpose is to
provide you with Aberdeen's latest research findings in the your
technology market and discuss
their relevance to your company.

A Designated
Analyst

Research
Access

Interactive
Briefing

Core Access
Deliverables
Telephone
and e-Mail
Access

Trade Show
Access
Aberdeen Group will meet
privately with clients to share
observations and perspectives at all relevant trade
shows that your Aberdeen
analyst attends. Typically,
your analyst would walk the
show floor with you and discuss the competition’s tradeshow positioning as well as
any hot new entrants.

PR and Press
Interaction

Aberdeen Group will make itself available as a creditable third-party source to
assist your public relations and press
release efforts with appropriate objective
quotes and background press briefings.

Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com

Reasonable telephone or
e-mail access is provided to
your designated Aberdeen
Group analyst for you and
another contact at your
company.

AberdeenGroup

Advisory Service

Relationship Building for Your Success
Since 1987, Aberdeen Group has approached the IT research market with a business
model that stresses building a close, one-on-one relationship with an expert industry analyst-consultant. Our success shows that our approach pays off in huge dividends to our
clients personally and to their firms.

Access to Analysts
The value of the Aberdeen Advisory Service is the ad hoc access to our market-research analyst-experts, so that the day-to-day “what about?” questions can be asked and answered —
allowing the timely, market-influencing response by your organization so necessary in
today’s tough and fast-moving markets. It is too difficult in complex markets to get the right
answers for your organization without completely understanding what changes will mean
and why. The ability to tap an IT industry analyst for an answer focused on your organization’s needs is invaluable.
Aberdeen Group Services
Aberdeen Group offers a wide variety of consulting services to technology suppliers, users, and
investors. These services can be customized and packaged to meet specific client requirements,
budgets, and timeframes. Our capabilities include:
•· Primary market research — Qualitative and quantitative market research data on eighteen
emerging technology markets, including custom strategy validation projects.
•· Consulting services — A variety of consulting services that help clients position their companies and products for success.
•· Audience education and training — Amplifying a client’s positioning and unique value
proposition through sales force and channel partner training, speeches, and publications
aimed at a variety of audiences.

Boston • Palo Alto • Ft. Collins • Amsterdam
www.aberdeen.com

