Peter S. Kastner
Executive Vice President and Chief Research Officer

Mr. Kastner is the corporate executive responsible for Aberdeen Group's research organization which consists of approximately forty analysts. He is responsible for the research operations including staff management, project management, business development, and product development. He is an officer of the corporation and a member of the board.

Area of Professional Focus
Mr. Kastner concentrates on the use of technology in commercial applications. Using his 30 years of commercial IT experience, Peter advises IT executives on technology risk management, life cycle benefits, micro-reengineering, and technology transitions.

For suppliers, Peter actively consults on market development, product planning, and competitive strategies. He is one of the computer industry's leading analysts of trends in OLTP, decision support, client/server architectures, distributed commercial systems development, electronic commerce, and commercial benchmark auditing and analysis. He has served as ad hoc marketing counsel to technology startups, been instrumental in billion-dollar roll-outs, and advised senior executives in business strategy including mergers and acquisitions.

He authored Aberdeen's 1990 research study "Transaction Processing into the 1990s: The Hardware Suppliers," the 1991 study "Evaluating Options in Microprocessor Multiprocessing," and a 1992 study on clustering technology. Mr. Kastner has authored over sixty publications during his tenure at Aberdeen, and has contributed research to and edited several hundred publications.

He speaks on behalf of Apple Computer, AT&T, Computer Associates and CA Ingres, CEO Institute, Digital Equipment, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Informix, Intel, NCR, Oracle, Sequent, Software AG, Stratus Computer, and Tandem Computers.

Mr. Kastner has considerable expertise in computer performance and capacity measurement. He was an auditor of benchmarks of and is now an industry advisor to the Transaction Processing Council, and is frequently quoted in the trade press.

Professional History
1988-present -- Executive Vice President, Group Vice President, and Vice President of Aberdeen Group, Inc.
1987-1988 -- Marketing Executive, Digital Equipment Corporation. Commercial market competitive analysis.
1981-1987 -- Market Development Manager, Stratus Computer, Inc. Market development, alternate channels, advertising, promotion, partnering programs.
1979-1981 -- Market Development Manager, Prime Computer, Inc. Government, finance, manufacturing markets.
1971-1979 -- Group Program Manager, Program Manager, consultant at Arthur D. Little Systems, Inc. (subsidiary of Arthur D. Little, Inc.). Dozens of complex technology development projects; US and overseas.
1969-1971 -- Senior Programmer/Analyst at PHI Computer Services, Inc. (subsidiary of Wang Laboratories). Commercial applications and systems development. Payroll/personnel systems, banking applications, application development tools.
1967-1969 -- Independent consultant at Cornell University. Contract application development.
1967-1968 -- Staff member, Langmuir Computer Laboratories, Cornell University.

Mr. Kastner attended Cornell University.

Peter S. Kastner Litigation Biography
Computer Consoles vs. GTE Government Systems -- 1992
GTE Products Corporation v. American Software, Inc. -- 1994
Unisys vs. Florida Health and Rehabilitative Services (HRS) -- 1989
[See PSK-litigation.docx for full case details]

Ten-Year Publication List (1988-1998)
Note that 1988 publications were for internal use at Digital Equipment Corporation. Publications from 1989 to the present were all associated with Aberdeen Group, Inc. Over 60 publications authored; several hundred contributed/edited.
