AberdeenGro
up
Systems and 
Network 
Management:
1998 
Practice 
Summary
May 1998
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
One Boston Place
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
USA
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
www.aberdeen.com
2
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Aberdeen Group is a Boston-based, computer and 
communications consulting and market-research 
organization.
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select 
group of domestic and international clients.    Each requires 
a combination of strategic advice and pragmatic, 
experience-based action plans.    Assignments range from 
corporate and product positioning and organizational 
planning to in-depth market segment research.    Aberdeen 
consults on mergers and acquisitions, corporate positioning 
and investor relations, transaction-processing benchmarks, 
and has special expertise in software and midrange    
computer markets.
In carrying out assignments, Aberdeen uses a proprietary, 
comprehensive, analytical framework providing fresh 
insight into the complex future of computing and 
communications, both from a technological and a market- 
dynamics perspective.    Aberdeen also offers retainer-fee 
programs to a group of continuing clients.
Aberdeen principals and staff are recognized industry 
figures with hundreds of years of combined high-tech 
industry, research and financial community experience 
among them.    They are quoted extensively in industry trade 
and business publications.    Each is a frequent conference 
and seminar speaker.
In addition to client-related research and consulting, 
Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, Aberdeen 
Viewpoints and Profiles, which summarize its analysis and 
research findings.
Information contained in this publication has been obtained from 
sources we believe to be reliable, but is not warranted by us.    Opinions 
reflect judgment at the time and are subject to change without notice.
3
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations 
mentioned in this publication are the property of their respective 
holders.
Warning:    This publication is protected by United States copyright law 
and international treaties.    Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents 
of this publication are copyrighted by Aberdeen Group, Inc., and may not 
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means without prior written consent.    Unauthorized 
reproduction or distribution of this publication, or any portion of it, may 
result in severe civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the 
maximum extent necessary to protect the rights of the publisher. 
© 1998 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
4
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABERDEEN’S SYSTEMS AND NETWORK MANAGEMENT 
PRACTICE
V
Description, Focus and Benefits
v
Strategic Market Questions
v
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1
Key Findings:
1
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
3
SYSTEMS AND NETWORK MANAGEMENT DEFINED
5
How Systems and Network Management Fits into Network Services
5
Core Systems and Network Management Components
5
Network Management
5
Systems Management
7
Application Management
9
How An Integrated Enterprise Management System Works
9
Business Benefits of Integrated Enterprise Management
10
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
11
Impact of Major IT Trends
11
Supplier Success Factors
13
User Success Factors
14
SUPPLIER ABSTRACTS
16
BMC Software, Inc.
16
Boole & Babbage
17
5
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Bull HN International
17
Cabletron Systems Inc.
18
Candle Corporation
19
Computer Associates
19
Hewlett-Packard, Company
20
IBM/Tivoli
21
Landmark Systems Corporation
21
Platinum Technology
22
6
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Preface
Aberdeen’s Systems and Network 
Management Practice 
Description, Focus and Benefits
The Systems and Network Management practice focuses on systems 
management solutions that combine system and network 
management functions to aid administrators in maintaining a 
computer network, plus application management solutions that aid 
administrators in maintaining the applications running on the 
network.    The Systems, Network, and Application Management 
practice especially focuses on the new systems and application 
management suites that use intelligent agents to provide a broad, 
integrated view of the network and automate many administrative 
tasks with minimal network and system overhead.
Both sets of solutions are increasingly key to enterprise planners’ 
efforts to drive down administrative costs and more effectively 
support and scale competitive-advantage applications in a time of 
rising network complexity and scarce resources.    However, to 
succeed in continuing to drive down costs and increasing 
application availability in the face of increasing administrative 
complexity, users must seek out the right tool for particular key 
applications and integrate it effectively with a broad systems 
management suite.    Thus, Aberdeen emphasizes careful analysis 
of both systems and application management solutions to 
determine the degree to which they not only fix but anticipate 
application problems, as well as their degree of integration with 
each other.
As the grease that keeps an enterprise network going, Systems, 
Network, and Application Management solutions are key to 
Aberdeen’s Network Services practice.    Moreover, these solutions 
hold the potential of allowing networks to adapt flexibly to new 
needs and technologies by stretching present resources, without 
costly additional hardware and software.
Strategic Market Questions
7
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
1. Will CA-Unicenter dominate the systems management 
market, or will upcoming Tivoli enhancements make it a 
stronger competitor? 
2. How long will it take for systems and application 
management solutions to integrate effectively so that each 
can leverage the other’s data? 
3. Are the new messaging and packaged-application 
administration tools up to the job? 
4. What are the key factors in successful Internet/Intranet 
administration? 
8
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter One
Executive Summary
Aberdeen uses the designation ‘Systems and Network 
Management’, or Enterprise Management (sometimes called 
‘Enterprise Systems Management,’ or even simply ‘Systems 
Management’) to denote the software supporting the activities 
involved in managing a computing infrastructure.    These activities 
include monitoring, problem detection/analy-sis/correction, 
maintenance, and upgrade of all of the enterprise’s computing and 
networking resources — from PCs to mainframes, from local disks 
to geographically far-flung servers, and from hardware to 
packaged applications.    Systems and Network Management 
concentrates on the status, performance, security, availability, and 
allocation of Information Technology resources, both in isolation 
and as part of the larger working whole.
The Aberdeen Systems and Network Management practice is made 
up of three broad domains, each itself comprised of further 
specialized functions:
·
Network management;
·
Systems management; and,
·
Application management.
While the technology in each of these domains differs, each 
functions in concert with the others to support an enterprise’s IT.    
Increasingly, a company’s ability to do business at all, never mind 
effectively compete, is only as strong as its IT infrastructure is 
healthy.    Thus, the effective integration of network management, 
systems management, and application management is increasingly 
key to an enterprise’s long-term success.
Key Findings:
·
The systems and network management market has bifurcated 
into distinct camps.    Computer Associates and Tivoli lead the 
way in the Framework camp:    cross-platform solutions share 
data in a common repository and share a common presentation 
style.    ‘Best-of-Breed’ is the rallying cry from a host of 
providers, led by Hewlett-Packard.    Framework proponents 
1
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
decry the lack of efficiency inherent in a series of point 
solutions, however well thought out.    The best-of-breed crowd 
point to the overhead and danger of vendor lock-in in a one-
size-fits-all approach to systems and network management.
·
Internet technology has redefined ‘enterprise network’ to 
include Intranets and Extranets, raising the urgency of 
managing security, managing remotely, and planning capacity 
proactively.      In security, increased exposure to cunning new 
viruses is a major headache for most IT shops.    In remote 
management, the Internet has brought new abilities to manage 
systems and networks across a potentially far-flung geography 
from a central location.    In capacity planning, users are finding 
that sizing resources to fit an ever-changing and unpredictable 
resource usage pattern is a larger challenge than ever before.
·
The management of applications is the fastest growing segment 
of enterprise management.
·
The continued trend of Service Level Agreement (SLA) adoption 
will create market opportunity for start-up companies offering 
innovative point solutions that support measurement and 
reporting of SLA compliance.
·
Aberdeen anticipates aggressive and innovative product and 
marketing assaults on an aging installed base of previous-
generation network management solutions.
·
Aberdeen expects to see a rise in the application of artificial 
intelligence technology (pattern recognition capability and 
expert system solutions) to management solutions, first in 
network management and then on behalf of systems and 
application management.
Today’s systems and network management solutions can stabilize 
the computing infrastructure in geographically distributed 
enterprises with multiple IT suppliers towards the level of 
reliability in the datacenter.    Aberdeen research shows that 
decreasing the “overhead” of poorly functioning or non-
functioning systems via effective systems and network 
management leads to increased organizational productivity, 
competitive advantage, and major improvements in an 
organization’s bottom line.
In This Report
The intended audience includes:    the IT buying community, 
suppliers of Enterprise Management solutions, the investment 
2
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
community (venture and advisory), and non-IS Executives charged 
with strategic IT decision making.
3
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Two
Summary of Findings
Key Aberdeen Findings
·
Supplier Sources — The majority of Enterprise Management 
products and offerings now come from third parties.    There are 
too many excellent product possibilities available today for any 
resource-stretched IS group to justify a primarily inhouse-built 
management strategy.    However, Aberdeen research does show 
that almost all IS organizations in large enterprises augment 
purchased solutions with a combination of home grown point 
enhancements and customization.
·
Professional services — Few enterprises embark on constructing 
large-scale enterprise management solutions without planning 
and implementation assistance from third parties.    System 
integrators, consultants, and ISV professional service personnel 
are used extensively in the initial stages of implementation.    
The need for professional services arises less from lack of 
product ‘user-friendliness’ than from the sophistication and 
complexity of the product sets.    Careful preplanning of such 
multi-faceted and layered capabilities as automatic, enterprise-
wide, policy-based administration can be the difference 
between competitive advantage and disaster.
·
Product Approach — Today’s primary line of demarcation in 
suppliers’ approaches to Enterprise Management is Framework 
vs. Best-of-Breed.    Characteristics of a Framework include a 
consistent user interface across products and functions, and a 
common database or central repository that can be accessed by 
all management functions.    The two leading proponents of 
Framework-oriented enterprise management are Computer 
Associates (Unicenter TNG), and IBM’s Tivoli (TME).    The Best-
of-Breed crowd advocates a building block approach to systems 
and network management in which an organization rigorously 
maps a product’s functionality to specific requirements.    This 
approach includes such suppliers as Hewlett-Packard, Bull, 
Platinum, BMC, Candle, and Sterling Software.
·
Framework acceptance will continue to spread through 
organizations, but will leave plenty of market real estate for 
best-of-breed competitors.
4
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
·
Market Growth — The Enterprise Management software market 
is growing at close to 20% annually.    While large-scale systems 
management and network management still command the lion’s 
share of the market, all elements of the market are growing.    
Aberdeen foresees accelerated growth in the Application 
Management/Measurement market as well as a favorable 
climate for solutions that are proactive rather than reactive in 
nature.    Solutions simplifying User Management (e.g., setting 
up and administering by groups/profiles, or license 
management) and Directory Service Management are also 
strong growth areas.
·
Role of Partnerships — Partnerships are critical for success in 
this market.    Few suppliers have either deep enough pockets or 
sufficient market presence to unblushingly claim that they 
could be all things to all organizations.    Of the few who do 
make that claim, all actively partner with companies that offer 
specialized products.    Likewise, Best-of-Breed suite providers 
and point product suppliers alike partner with each other as 
well as with framework giants.
·
Decision Makers — Aberdeen finds that much of the buying 
process for solutions still remains localized at the operational 
level.    Narrow product suites and point products are typically 
bought by Line of Business managers and IS functional area 
managers. However, while recommendations for large-scale 
solutions come from the operational ranks, enterprise-wide 
strategic decisions are made by senior IS managers and CIOs.
·
Buying Criteria — In a series of face-to-face interviews with CIOs 
of Fortune 100 companies, Aberdeen found that the number one 
buying criterion for systems and network management 
products is suitability to task.    This is true whether discussing 
point products, suites, or any all-inclusive solution.    IT buyers 
are willing to sacrifice a small degree of second-tier 
functionality in exchange for effective integration (synergy 
between products, efficiencies, ease-of-use, reduced number of 
consoles required, event correlation and filtering), but will only 
make small concessions.    Other criteria include time to value 
(ease of implementation), professional services available, and 
product vision/future. The larger and more strategic an 
implementation will be, the more a company’s market strength 
and financial help come into the buying decision process.
·
At the high end, the market is increasingly price insensitive.    
This trend reflects enterprises’ growing realization that the 
5
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
success or failure of systems and network management directly 
impacts a company’s ability to conduct business and compete in 
its own market.
6
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Three
Systems and Network Management Defined
How Systems and Network Management Fits into Network 
Services
Systems and Network Management is a broad category of primarily 
software-based solutions for managing all aspects of an enterprise 
computing infrastructure – network, systems, and applications.    As 
business applications become more agile and distributed, their 
effectiveness requires unhindered movement across an 
increasingly open, distributed, and heterogeneous landscape.
With Internet technology now pervasive, users expect quick and 
transparent access to IT resources anywhere in the world.    
Increasingly, that expectation is quantified in specific Service Level 
Agreements that turn users into clients, and IS organizations into 
competitively honed service providers.
Systems and Network Management applications are used to keep 
the computing infrastructure up and running across and beyond 
the enterprise.    At a bare minimum, this means maintaining 
stability.    More often it means managing scalability, availability, 
performance, and flexibility in all aspects of an enterprise’s 
Network Services.
Core Systems and Network Management Components
Core systems and network management components include:
5. Network Management;
6. Systems Management; and,
7. Application Management.
Network Management
Network management monitors and controls the network links 
between systems in an enterprise.    This includes all physical 
connections and connection devices that go into making up a 
network (such as hubs, routers, cabling, switches, modems, and 
multiplexers).    Focusing on the lower levels of the ISO, SNA, and 
TCP/IP models (physical and logical connectivity layers), network 
7
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
management does not address issues pertaining to higher-level 
application services.
Other than an ‘are you there? ping’, the lowest common 
denominator in enterprise network management today is the 
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).    SNMP is an 
application layer protocol that facilitates the exchange of 
management information between network devices.    SNMP is 
designed to cover only the basics of TCP/IP network management.    
As networks and enterprises continue to evolve rapidly, network 
management solutions based on SNMP technology come face to 
face with the limitations inherent in its design.
While network management is a well-defined discipline, it is 
undergoing rapid change. Internet technology is the driving force 
as well as the primary enabler of that change, dynamically 
redefining the boundaries of the network and the meaning of the 
‘enterprise’ itself.    At the same time, businesses are demanding 
higher-than-ever network availability of 99+% as a minimum 
standard of acceptable service, raising the bar for network 
management software.
Other components of network management include:
8. Topology Management – identifying and displaying the 
elements of the network and their interconnections, or 
“topology”.
9. Status Monitoring – At a minimum, management 
systems detect when a network device such as a hub or 
router fails and report the failure to a network manager.    
Increasingly, management systems are able go beyond 
simple reporting to take corrective action upon detection 
of a fault.
10.Network Performance Monitoring and Management – 
Both real-time and historical monitoring of network 
performance provide quantitative information on the 
status of network services.    Historical data establishes 
trend information that is useful in predictive and 
proactive network management.    Trend information 
provides a quantitative basis for intelligently acquiring or 
allocating network resources.    It can also be used to 
inform real-time systems and establish performance 
thresholds.
The performance management system may also diagnose 
and fix a problem, issue a trouble ticket, page or e-mail a 
network manager, or forward an alert.    Performance 
8
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
information is used to reallocate network resources (such 
as bandwidth) from overburdened to underutilized 
network segments for effective load balancing.
11.Event Correlation and Management – Network 
management applications receive, log, process and act 
upon a continuous stream of events.
12.Trouble Ticketing – In order to track and manage 
problems, trouble ticketing software assigns 
responsibility for each specific event or problem and 
follows it through to resolution.
Systems Management
When computers lived in “glass-house” datacenters, systems 
management handled a strictly bounded world.    Today, when a 
system can live anywhere – in a glass house or in a coat pocket – 
the definition of systems management is changing almost as 
quickly as the enterprise itself.    Distributed applications, 
indifferent to geographic and vendor boundaries, demand that the 
reliability associated with the mainframe environment be 
replicated in a systems environment that is exponentially more 
complex than ever before.    The rate of change shows no signs of 
slowing.
Elements of Systems Management include:
13.Software Distribution and Management — One of the 
most time-consuming activities in systems management is 
the delivery, installation, and upkeep of software in a 
distributed enterprise.    Business applications, operating 
systems, databases, office automation products, and web 
browsers across multiple hardware, network, and 
operating platforms must be constantly maintained and 
refreshed.    Thus, successful software deployment must 
be preceded by an accurate hardware and software 
inventory of all destination servers and desktops.
In recent years, Desktop Management has emerged as a 
specialized discipline to deal with the wasteland of 
expended energy that the PC can be.    With the advent of 
the DMI (Desktop Management Interface) protocol from 
the Desktop Management Taskforce (DMTF), as well as 
other open standards, desktop management will 
increasingly be brought back into the province of 
enterprise management.
9
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
14.Storage Management — With heterogeneous storage 
devices, storage networks, communications protocols, and 
links to applications and operating systems to deal with, 
ensuring adequate performance, availability, and upgrade 
of disk and tape storage is no simple matter.    And 
Internet technology has caused an explosion of storage 
capacity, making matters yet more complex.    Aberdeen 
has a practice dedicated to the Storage Management 
space.
Disaster Recovery — although in the past this was a 
separate solution, increasingly Disaster Recovery is 
included under the Systems Management umbrella.    
Disaster Recovery aims to handle extreme disaster – loss 
of business-critical data or obliteration of a computing 
center.    Policies, procedures, and products are put in 
place that correspond to the degree of criticality that a 
particular data loss represents for a given organization.    
In all cases, the more automated and routine the backup 
procedures are, the higher the likelihood of total recovery 
in the face of disaster.
Output Management — The goal of output management is 
to enable output to any endpoint, by any means, inside or 
outside the enterprise.    Delivery vehicles include e-mail, 
fax, networks, and printers.    Endpoints include legacy 
systems, laptops, and everything in between.
Systems Performance Monitoring and Management — 
Performance monitoring and management specifically 
focuses on improving application and overall 
performance, not on keeping the system running.    Today, 
specialized software for monitoring system variables 
quantifies performance both in real-time and historically. 
Trend analysis, developed over time, can be applied real-
time to predictively and proactively manage system 
performance.
Job Scheduling — The question of what jobs run where and 
when is not new:    robust job scheduling tools harken 
back to the earliest mainframes.    However, scheduling 
execution across a distributed client-server enterprise 
requires that the same question be answered in a 
profoundly more complex environment.    Going well 
beyond traditional batch job scheduling, today’s dynamic 
workload management has the ability to act as a network-
10
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
level operating system, turning an IT infrastructure into a 
‘virtual mainframe’.
15.Security Management – In ranking top IS manager 
priorities, system security comes in just below the threat 
of Year 2000 in importance.    The heterogeneous and 
distributed nature of today’s systems present 
administrative nightmares of user ID tracking and 
authentication.    Increasingly, users are demanding that 
they not be stopped at the border of every system to 
which they have access in order to legitimize their 
entrance.    Rather, they seek ‘single sign-on’ in which 
successfully passing one security checkpoint at the 
beginning of the day clears a user’s way to all allowable 
resources, whether they are contained in desktop systems 
or belong to remote sites.
Viruses, hackers, disgruntled employees, and competitors 
have always posed a threat to the security of vital 
corporate information.    Today, however, the Internet, in 
all of its permutations, has escalated the security question 
from headache to crisis.    As a matter of business priority, 
organizations must open portions of their systems to 
varying levels of outsiders, while vigilantly protecting all 
other aspects of the enterprise from encroachment.    The 
fact that much of what must be protected is 
geographically as well as technologically diverse further 
complicates the mission of implementing and enforcing 
security.    Aberdeen has a Security practice that is 
independent of the Systems and Network Management 
Practice.
16.Help Desk – Help desk software supports enterprise help 
desks:    a combination of automation and personnel that 
handles end-user questions and problems.    Trouble 
ticketing, change management, communication of state 
changes, user profile information, and system and 
network status information are all part of help desk 
problem resolution.    The increased application of 
automation to the help desk has encouraged many such 
groups to implement proactive problem avoidance 
techniques and move toward a service desk view of the 
enterprise.    A separate CIS Practice exists within 
Aberdeen.
11
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Application Management
The enterprise infrastructure exists in order that business 
applications can operate.    Yet, until relatively recently, there was 
no effective way to monitor and manage enterprise applications.    
Conventional network and systems management technologies can 
observe the results of application behavior, but are not very helpful 
in determining causes.
In the last few years, a market slice has been emerging to deal 
specifically, and in depth, with the management of applications.    
Straddling the worlds of application development and 
systems/network management, new application management 
products address application performance, configuration, security, 
and accounting (software asset management).
Aberdeen anticipates that the Applications Management and 
Measurement segment will experience significant growth as 
Service Level Agreements proliferate.    The proliferation of SLAs in 
combination with the emerging acceptance of the Application 
Response Monitor (ARM) API will have the effect of moving issues 
of manageability further back in the application development 
lifecycle.
How An Integrated Enterprise Management System Works
Today, most enterprise management solutions as implemented in 
real-world organizations are a balancing of the old and the new, 
but with a strategic direction headed toward integrated enterprise 
management.    Levels of integration include:
·
No integration — a collection of unrelated stovepiped point 
solutions;
·
Screen-level integration — individual point solutions are visible 
and launched from a single console, framework, or GUI;
·
Event-level integration — management applications share 
repositories, are aware of each other, and depend on each other; 
and,
·
Business-centric integration (still, for the most part, in the 
future) — a solution in which IT resource management and 
allocation will directly reflect the business priorities associated 
with the processes supported.    Achievement of business-based 
integration will require more than additional technology; it will 
require massive cultural changes within organizations.
Business Benefits of Integrated Enterprise Management
12
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Integrated Enterprise Management provides more data for a 
broader, more detailed analysis of enterprise networks.    It helps to 
avoid the fingerpointing that occurs when products from multiple 
suppliers are involved in a problem.    It increases the likelihood 
that fixes for one part of the enterprise network, such as a disk 
crash, do not negatively impact the overall network, e.g., by 
bringing down all business-critical applications that use that disk.    
Above all, it allows IS not only to take an overall view of the 
enterprise network, but also to dive down into detail when needed.
Development Tools
DBMS
Networking Devices
Windows NT
SCO
HP-UX
Solaris
Other
Unix
Desktops
Workstations
NT/Intel 
Servers
Enterprise 
Hardware
Operating Environments
Systems and Network Management
Source: Aberdeen Group, April 1988
13
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Four
Issues and Challenges
Impact of Major IT Trends
The Internet.    The Internet in all of its Extranet and Intranet 
permutations continues to have a profound effect on enterprise 
management.    Suppliers and customers alike join mobile users 
and telecommuters in an ever-expanding supply (and demand) 
chain, raising the question "what now defines an ‘enterprise’?"    
Internet technology impacts systems and network management in 
many ways:
·
Demands on systems and network resources are 
unpredictable;
·
Security considerations increase in complexity and 
difficulty;
·
Geographical and organizational boundaries are 
meaningless;
·
New applications are proliferating, enabled by 
technology; and,
·
Computing infrastructure is increasingly heterogeneous 
and complex.
Aberdeen finds that today’s systems and network management 
solutions are beginning to face up to the Internet with new 
capabilities (e.g., “firewalls” that are incorporated inside the 
systems management solution), but that these do not yet extend 
well to Extranets beyond the boundaries of the traditional 
organization.
Transition to client-server and network-centric applications.    
Companies are trying to balance aggressive client-server 
deployment with systems and network management solutions and 
practices that will produce the reliability of mainframes.    Most 
large organizations now have management requirements that span 
mainframes, Unix-based systems, LAN implementations, and 
remote users.    The speed with which new distributed applications 
and technology are deployed demands that management solutions 
keep pace.    As a result, enterprise management automation is 
increasing in IS importance as a strategic investment.    Network 
14
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Computers or NetPCs, for example, make network performance 
and availability more critical than ever.    However, they allow 
suppliers to automate and simplify systems management efforts 
such as monitoring, asset management, and security.
Transition to open systems.    Open systems are a double-edged 
sword to enterprise management endeavors:    openness enables 
more complex applications stretching the logical parameters of the 
enterprise, but the increasing number of suppliers and products 
involved makes management of these applications more difficult.    
Overall, however, openness is a plus for IS:    increased openness in 
computing resources and in management solutions has made it 
practical and advisable to centralize management efforts for 
greater administrative cost-effectiveness.
Year 2000.    The year 2000 is an immovable deadline that looms 
large across all IT organizations.    Year 2000 initiatives continue to 
drain financial and skill resources, increasing the pressure on 
organizations to automate systems management as thoroughly as is 
possible.    While most media attention has focused on the specter 
of applications failing around the world, the complexity and 
diversity of both the computing infrastructure and the 
management solutions in place means that the year 2000 casts a 
very large shadow across the operational side of the IT fence.    Any 
company conducting business in or with the European Community 
is faced with the exacerbating challenge of making all systems 
Euro currency-ready.
Business-centric Enterprise Management.    Corporations are moving 
towards a business-centric view of IS.    In the Enterprise 
Management arena, this is resulting in:
1. Service Level Agreements (SLA) that quantify the services that 
IS will deliver to users.    Most SLAs are drafted in terms of 
application response time and availability, reflecting the 
priorities of the lines of business.    IS departments commit to 
sustaining agreed-upon service levels and achieve them by 
managing the underlying components that make up the 
applications.    SLA is gaining rapid acceptance in corporations 
globally, increasing the pressure on IS to manage the enterprise 
and introducing a requirement for SLA measurement/reporting 
automation.
2. A new emphasis on application management.    The 
management of applications is the fastest growing segment of 
enterprise management.    Organizations are also beginning to 
15
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
realize that effective application management must begin with 
application development, and are beginning to mandate that 
developers build manageability into their software from the 
start.    While early adopters of this mindset are already reaping 
benefits, widespread implementation requires that 
organizational and procedural changes be mandated from the 
top of a corporation on down through the ranks.
3. Increased demand for policy-based capabilities in systems and 
network management solutions.    These policies reflect the 
business value of any process using computing resources.    
Thus, based on such policies, management solutions can 
automatically allocate resources to maximize business value.    
For example, a policy might give a higher network priority to an 
on-line customer order desk that cannot tolerate degradation 
than to a batch payroll application that can be run at night.    
Successful Enterprise Management policy-based solutions also 
aim to flexibly accommodate changing business dynamics.
4. Proactive anticipation of problems.    Business-centric enterprise 
management requires that IT be able to identify what business 
processes will be impacted downstream from system events.    
What-if modeling and dynamic workflow management based on 
policy parameters are becoming ever more common in 
management solutions.
Arrival of new technologies.    Formerly arcane disciplines such as 
neural net technology and expert-based systems are becoming 
mainstreamed into the enterprise management arena.    These new 
technologies give IS buyers more efficient ways to manage the 
enterprise more proactively.    Thus, new-technology-based 
solutions aim to identify potential problems, diagnose the root 
cause, and take corrective action before users are aware of any 
interruption or slow-down.
Supplier Success Factors
Suppliers of comprehensive enterprise management and highly 
focused point solutions alike are in a highly competitive market 
and are faced with an increasingly sophisticated IS buying 
community.    In hundreds of in-depth face-to-face conversations 
with IS decision makers, Aberdeen has found the following 
generalizations to be universal:
·
Functionality/suitability to task is the number one Enterprise 
Management requirement.    IS buyers are not impressed with 
suite pricing and market packages if there is not a clear and 
16
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
synergistic benefit in terms of functionality to be gained in 
using multiple solutions from a single supplier.
·
Ease of use for administrators is a major IS buying criterion.    
This allows IS buyers to cut down on administrative costs, a key 
user concern.
·
Openness and ability to integrate with other Enterprise 
Management solutions is a cost-of-entry issue.
·
A strong Enterprise Management architecture, including 
platform flexibility and scalability, is vital.
·
Professional services and the level of support available are of 
high importance.
·
IS buyers need to feel confident of a vendor’s financial stability 
and ability to deliver on its promises.
Cost is generally not a consideration until after the basic decision 
to buy has been made.
Therefore, in order to successfully compete in any segment of the 
systems and network market, suppliers should:
1. Deliver a solution with strong ease of use/administrative 
cost-effectiveness, architectural flexibility, 
performance/scalability, and ability to deliver enterprise-
application robustness. 
2. Provide a clear vision for the supplier’s future direction that 
includes support for business-centric Enterprise 
Management.
3. Emphasize services and proactive management as a 
component of the solution. 
User Success Factors
The methodologies for selecting and implementing an enterprise 
systems management strategy are almost as varied as the 
organizations themselves.    However, Aberdeen can make some 
real-world-based observations and recommendations that will 
generally lead toward success:
·
Enterprise Management is a strategic endeavor to any 
organization in which computing resources support the life-
blood of the company.    To be successful, Enterprise 
Management will have to cross organizational and geographic 
boundaries freely.    Users should make certain that support 
17
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
from the CIO and all executive management exists to 1.) 
approve the financial and personnel resources required for all 
phases of the project, and 2.) reorganize in order that the 
corporate structure maps to IS’ operational requirements for 
efficient execution against plan.
·
Put together a team that represents all affected groups including 
lines of business and the development side of IS.    Build a set of 
requirements that are prioritized and succinct.    No one solution 
or even combination of solutions will ever please everyone.    
However, if everyone gets behind a business-centric point of 
view, priorities will be easier to establish.
·
Consider centralizing or at least consolidating Help Desks and 
Data Centers.    Aberdeen has found that there is much synergy 
and ability to leverage resources when help desks are 
centralized.
·
Develop as little homegrown product as is possible.
·
Develop a Year 2000 roadmap that accounts for all management 
solutions and managed resources.
·
Plan for an on-going process of improvements from the 
beginning.
·
When making commitments for Service Level Agreements, 
make certain that IS is not going to be held accountable for 
factors over which it has no control or which it has no ability to 
accurately measure.
18
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Five
Supplier Abstracts
BMC Software, Inc. 
2101 CityWest Blvd.
Houston, TX 77042-2827 
Tel: (713) 918-8800 
www.bmc.com
Market Position
BMC’s PATROL family of application management products offer a 
console option, including a Web browser interface.    PATROL 
products can also be integrated with the major frameworks 
available for enterprise management, including Cabletron 
SPECTRUM, HP OpenView IT/Opera-tions, HP OpenView Network 
Node Manager, IBM NetView, POLYCEN-TER Manager on NetView, 
Solstice SunNet Manager, Tivoli Management Environment, and 
any other SNMP-based framework.    Recently, BMC acquired BGS, 
with plans to subsume the BEST/1 family of performance 
monitoring and modeling products into PATROL.    BMC has also 
developed a broad array of partnerships that allow PATROL to 
manage most major databases and packaged applications in a 
customized way.
Aberdeen Conclusions
BMC’s application and data management focus has been well 
received in the market to date.    Aberdeen anticipates that this 
market segment will experience strong growth in the coming year, 
and BMC will be well positioned to benefit.    To succeed, BMC 
should continue to focus strongly on extending its PATROL 
solutions without getting distracted by the logistics of bringing BGS 
under its umbrella.
19
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Boole & Babbage
3131 Zanker Road
San Jose, CA 95134-1933
(403) 526-3000
www.boole.com
Market Position
Boole & Babbage has achieved a solid niche in the enterprise 
management space with its COMMAND/Post.    The product, built 
around a family of capable management point solutions, takes 
information from these solutions, as well as from a wide range of 
third party products.    COMMAND/Post is an able manager of 
managers (MOM).    Other product lines include MainView for 
mainframe and sysplex environments; Storage Automation 
Solutions for enterprise-wide storage management; and MQ for 
delivering messages between legacy and distributed applications.    
Boole & Babbage addresses the Service Level Agreement 
marketplace with a message of proactive Desired State 
management.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Boole & Babbage is one of the oldest and most-respected of the 
systems management companies.    Its client list includes the most 
recognizable of the Global 2000 companies.    Aberdeen finds that 
the company requires a crisp and clear market positioning to 
position Boole & Babbage’s product offerings to good advantage in 
the enterprise management space.    Though well-known in 
traditional mainframe shops, Boole & Babbage’s challenge is to 
make itself equally well known to a new generation of 
administrators and CIOs.    Aberdeen concludes that Boole & 
Babbage’s high-quality products will meet their goals if it delivers 
marketing efforts of equal quality.
Bull HN International
Billerica, MA
800-285-5727
www.openmaster.com
Market Position
Bull HN has a highly integrated, deeply functional enterprise 
management solution called ‘OpenMaster’.    As the name suggests, 
20
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
it is based on open management standards.    Aberdeen finds that 
OpenMaster offers good functionality “out of the box”.    
OpenMaster is particularly appropriate for large enterprises, since 
it has excellent scalability and an interface that is easily 
customized for users of all skill levels.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Bull’s OpenMaster deserves a wider audience than it has so far 
received.    In a market where too often marketing hype gets ahead 
of deliverable reality, Bull’s OpenMaster is an exception.    
Aberdeen finds that Bull has a marketing, not a product, problem 
that could lend itself to a happy conclusion if addressed 
immediately and vigorously.    However, Bull also must deal with a 
lack of mindshare, particularly among major U.S. corporations.
Cabletron Systems Inc.
35 Industrial Way
Rochester, NH    03866
603-332-9400
www.ctron.com
Market Position
Cabletron, coming from a hub/switch background, brings rich 
networking credentials to its SPECTRUM family of management 
solutions.    SPECTRUM is primarily a network management 
solution that is scalable and very functional.    Cabletron expands 
and deepens its capabilities with a range of partnerships including 
BMC, Concord Communications, and Nortel.    The SPECTRUM 
Portable Management Applications (SPMAs) form a family of 
management modules and applications for Cabletron devices in HP 
OpenView’s/UNIX and Network Node Manager, SunNet Manager, 
and IBM’s NetView 6000.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Cabletron faces a major challenge as its market turns away from 
simply buying hubs and switches, and SPECTRUM is crucial to 
Cabletron’s survival.    To succeed, Cabletron will not only have to 
partner rapidly with major Enterprise Management and 
application management providers, but also change a corporate 
culture that is still focused more on its past successes.
21
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Candle Corporation
2425 Olympic Boulevard
Santa Monica, CA    90404
www.candle.com
Market Position
Candle Corporation is one of the largest privately held software 
companies in the world, offering a wide range of application 
monitoring, management, and measurement solutions.    Candle’s 
ETEWatch family of products provide end-to-end application 
response time measurement, while application-specific solutions 
such as IntelliWatch for Lotus Notes apply in-depth mastery of a 
niche.    Candle’s original early success was with OMEGAMON in the 
mainframe systems management environment, where Candle 
continues to thrive.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Candle has not benefited from its diffused market message.    Its 
strategic direction is unclear.    While Candle has some outstanding 
enterprise-class solutions such as OMEGAMON and IntelliWatch, 
there is no apparent synergy between the product lines.    At the 
same time, Aberdeen finds that Candle has the financial strength to 
survive as it crafts a market-ready message and strategy.    
Aberdeen anticipates that Candle will address the company’s lack 
of focus by establishing clear division-like business units, and/or by 
acquiring solutions that will allow development of a synergistic 
application and systems management market message.
Computer Associates
One Computer Associates Plaza
Islandia, NY 11788-7000
516-DIAL-CAI
www.cai.com
Market Position
Computer Associates’ Unicenter TNG is an exceptionally 
comprehensive Enterprise Management solution.    CA has shipped 
almost 4 million copies internationally, giving it a huge market 
presence as well as an impressive level of sales revenue.    CA offers 
stand-alone management products (Workgroup Edition) through 
channels for workgroups or smaller companies, and enterprise-
22
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
capable modules (Enterprise Edition) for companies not ready for a 
full TNG implementation.    Both the Workgroup and Enterprise 
Editions come with CA’s ubiquitous (and no-charge) framework.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Computer Associates has a very large footprint in the market with 
its Unicenter TNG framework and enterprise management 
solutions.    Aberdeen finds that CA’s marketing engine, fueled with 
solid software marketing know-how, has brought the solid 
Unicenter TNG to the forefront of its market.    Computer Associates 
continues to add features and solution areas to Unicenter as well as 
announcing major strategic directions.    Aberdeen research shows 
that CA regularly gives its customers a clear vision for the future 
and has crisply honed market positioning.    Aberdeen concludes 
that Unicenter TNG will be a leader in the enterprise management 
market for years to come.
Hewlett-Packard, Company
100 Mayfield Avenue
Mountainview, CA    94043
www.hp.com
Market Position
Hewlett-Packard was the early clear market leader in the 
enterprise management market with its OpenView family of 
products.    Network Node Manager (NNM) was the spearhead of 
OpenView’s early market dominance.    There is no major function 
that is currently not under the OpenView umbrella, as well as a 
number of “finesse” functions.    HP has eschewed the framework 
fray, espousing ‘best of breed’ functionality and claiming IT Service 
Management (ITSM) as its primary market differentiator.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Hewlett-Packard has a lot of product, a strong distribution channel, 
and a healthy balance sheet.    What it has not had in recent years is 
a clear and compelling go-to-market message in the Enterprise 
Management space.    As a result, OpenView has an increasingly 
lower profile in the market and is now playing David where it had 
once been Goliath.    Aberdeen concludes that HP has far too many 
market strengths to count OpenView out.    However, we find that 
continued high ranking among Enterprise-Management contenders 
is far from guaranteed.
23
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
IBM/Tivoli
Austin, TX
512-436-8000
www.tivoli.com
Market Position
When IBM acquired Tivoli, both companies as well as thousands of 
customers benefited.    IBM has long had a successful product that 
is still active in the market, NetView.    NetView is now the network 
console of Tivoli’s TME 10, a powerful and flexible environment for 
enterprise management.    The architecture lends itself to 
customization and integration with third party solutions.    In this 
case, one of its strengths is also its weakness, as it is not a solution 
for anyone hoping for ‘out-of-the-box’ functionality.    IBM has also 
announced a fully integrated solution targeted to small companies, 
IT Director, which is sold through distributors.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Tivoli was one of the earliest innovators in the enterprise 
management space and has a large, loyal installed base.    However, 
the market is looking for IBM to reassert its technical and 
marketing prowess in bringing Tivoli TME 10 back into market 
contender shape.    Aberdeen anticipates that IBM and Tivoli will 
not disappoint their followers, but finds that regaining market 
momentum will not be accomplished with a grand announcement. 
The market needs to see a clear vision for the long term as well as 
deliverables in the near term.
Landmark Systems Corporation
8000 Towers Crescent Drive
Vienna, VA 22182
703-902-8000
www.landmark.com
Market Position
Landmark’s Performance Works family of solutions provides deep 
functionality across a range of systems management areas.    Most 
recently, Landmark added SmartWatch to the family, bringing the 
ability to do application performance management from the 
desktop user’s point of view.    When coupled with its other 
performance management tools, SmartWatch has strong 
24
Systems and Network Management Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
credentials in an SLA market.    Landmark deliberately 
differentiates itself with a philosophy (backed by the appropriate 
products) that performance management is most effective when it 
maps across an application’s entire lifecycle.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Landmark’s market message is clear and targeted:    performance 
management is Landmark’s strategic direction.    Aberdeen 
anticipates that Landmark’s message and products will find an 
increasingly wide audience as SLA in IT continues to grow.    
Aberdeen finds that when and if Landmark adds a network 
component to match its other performance management solutions, 
it will be a powerful market presence.
Platinum Technology
1815 South Meyers Road
Oakbrook Terrace, IL 60181-5241
800-442-6861
www.platinum.com
Market Position
Platinum is relatively new in the systems management space with 
its ProVision family of solutions.    Its framework-like architecture 
is called ‘Platinum Open Enterprise Management Services’ (POEMS) 
and it is designed to accept third party products as well as 
ProVision solutions.    While the ProVision family has no network 
component, its systems management solutions are “deep”, offering 
a wealth of functionality for each task.
Aberdeen Conclusions
Platinum has entered the systems management space thoughtfully 
and with a strong initial showing, choosing depth of function over 
range.    However, it remains for Platinum to gain mind share as 
well as market share.    Moreover, Platinum has undergone a period 
of aggressive acquisition in systems management and other 
infrastructure products, and is now faced with the challenge of 
successfully integrating all of its businesses.    Nevertheless, 
Aberdeen finds that Platinum is a company worth watching in the 
systems management space.
25
