URL: http://smallbiztechnology.com/archive/2002/11/news-factor-laptop-performance.html

News Factor: The Laptop Performance Bottleneck | Smallbiztechnology.com 

 Skip to main content 

 Smallbiztechnology.com: Tech Insight and News for Small Businesses 

 Home 

 Archive 

 Resources 

 About 

 Advertise 

 Contact 

 Campaigner - do more for your email marketing services
Skype Contest - How does your business use it?

November 18, 2002

News Factor: The Laptop Performance Bottleneck

 Email 
 Share: 

 My spin: Get a good laptop, docking station, external monitor and a few more things... and then ditch your desktop 

Designers of mobile disk drives face a unique set of challenges. They must strive to ensure their products occupy less space, consume less power and are more shock resistant than desktop hard drives. As convenient as mobile computers are, they have always been sluggish compared with desktop PCs. Hard drive speed has been the biggest bottleneck. Although disk drives are not the only mobile components that lag behind their desktop counterparts, they are by far the most noticeable. "Hard drive speed counts for an awful lot of overall computing responsiveness," Peter Kastner, executive vice president and chief research officer at Aberdeen Group, told NewsFactor. (full story) 

 0 comments 

 email this 

-->

Post a comment

 Sign in to comment on this entry, or comment anonymously. 

 Name 

 Email (will not be published or shared) 

 Website (optional) 

 Remember personal info? 

 Comments (you may use HTML tags for style) 

Recent Posts

 Are You Ready for Pandemics and Disasters? Is Your Technology? 

 Boosting Online Sales Is More Then Web Sites, Email Newsletters and E-Commerce 

 Five tips to being more professional on social networks 

 Hiring Expertise For Profitable and Strategic Growth Is A Must 

 A Complete Checklist for Just Getting Started with Email Marketing 

 HP ProBook 4510s Notebook: Compute in Style and for a Long Time... on a Budget 

 Using Old Computers Does Not Save You Money 

 40% Of "Work" At Work Is Not Work: What Can You Do To Boost Your Employee's Online Productivity 

 The Hunt for (Accurate) Leads Is Easy, If You Have The Right Tool - Linkedin vs Jigsaw 

 Payroll: Without Tech Help It's A Pain And Tax Penalties Await - A Look at Paycycle 

 Small Business Technology Executive video Series....uncut Bringing you the technology leaders behind your technology.

 Full video archive 

 -->

 Subscribe to Small Business Technology Report 

Every week - news, analysis and insight to help you use technology as a tool to grow your business

What is Smallbiztechnology.com?

Smallbiztechnology.com helps small-medium sized businesses strategically use technology as a tool to grow their businesses and provides news, articles, discussion boards, resources, analysis & events for the owners of small to medium sized businesses.

 Subscribe to the Smallbiztechnology RSS feed .

 Join our Facebook Page .

 Get cell phone Tweats (updates) via Twitter .

 Six Rules for Using Technology in Your Business 

 -->

 Small Business Event & Contest Calendar 

 -->

 Technology Solutions for Growing Business (2004) 

 2008 version , new content, fresh deisgn coming soon...

 -->

 -->

 -->

 -->

 -->

 -->

 Online Event Registration - Powered by www.eventbrite.com 

 -->

 -->

© 2008 Smallbiztechnology.com | Feeds | Powered by MT