
                                      AberdeenGroup











                                      InfiniBand Architecture:
                                      Planning the
                                      Next-Generation
                                      Data Center


                                      An Executive White Paper

                                      May 2002


























                                      Aberdeen Group, Inc.
                                      One Boston Place
                                      Boston, Massachusetts 02108 USA
                                      Telephone: 617 723 7890
                                      Fax: 617 723 7897
                                      www.aberdeen.com


InfiniBand:  Planning the Next-Generation Data Center


Preface

The relentless demand for Information Technology (IT) scale in the typical
enterprise continues to drive advancements in network performance and
computing systems technology.  However, advancements in processor speeds
and network bandwidth have exposed the I/O (input/output) bus architecture
as a key performance constraint in the data center.  Currently, one of the
efforts being done to relieve this critical bottleneck is the movement
toward networking I/O functions.  IT (Information Technology) planners need
to be aware of several important architectural and product enhancements
that will affect power and scalability in the modern data center over the
next 18 months.  InfiniBand is a new approach to satisfying I/O
requirements in the data center.
InfiniBand, entailing “infinite bandwidth,” provides a standardized
interconnect that allows businesses to buy storage and computing power
separately in incremental steps from multiple suppliers.  This new
technology promises to overcome the complexities and limitations that
increasingly plague today’s IT data center resulting from an interconnect
framework constrained by an old technology paradigm.  InfiniBand is a
serial, switched fabric architecture designed to overcome many of the
limitations of today's shared memory and shared parallel bus I/O
architectures.  Leading server and I/O suppliers ( as well as a host of new
companies ( are expected to introduce a slew of new InfiniBand products
beginning this year and continuing as the adoption of the InfiniBand
architecture in the data center accelerates over the next several years.
The purpose of this Aberdeen Executive White Paper is to provide an
overview of the emerging InfiniBand architecture (IBA) and to put it into
proper context with today’s I/O infrastructure.  This paper offers a
perspective of what IBA means for the future of enterprise computing and to
highlight what the IT executives need to know in order to plan and prepare
for IBA deployment in an enterprise environment.

What Is InfiniBand?

One method for increasing overall systems performance is to design a
systems architecture that frees the CPUs (central processing units) from
having to handle communications and networking tasks.  By “front-ending”
communications and networking tasks, back-end processors can be dedicated
to number crunching, transaction processing, batch processing, and other
computing tasks.  This concept is not really new.  It was first introduced
decades ago and has evolved into a powerful I/O architecture built into
today’s mainframes.
Backed by leading industry suppliers, InfiniBand defines a common standard
for handling communications, storage, and networking I/O.  This new
standard led to the formation of the InfiniBand Trade Association (IBTA).
Currently, the steering committee for the IBTA is composed of market
leaders  such as Compaq, Dell, HP, Intel, IBM, Microsoft, and Sun
Microsystems.  There are currently more than 200 IBA technology sponsors
including companies such as Adaptec, Cisco, Lucent, Nortel, NEC, Hitachi,
Fujitsu-Siemens, and 3COM.  With such leading industry backers, the
InfiniBand architecture appears to have the substantial support needed for
a strong market entry and widespread acceptance.
Simply defined, InfiniBand is a new-generation I/O architecture standard
that uses a networked approach to connecting servers, storage, and network
devices in a data center.  Using a technique called “switched fabric,”
InfiniBand carries I/O traffic from server processors to peripherals and
other processors or servers throughout an enterprise.  This new high
bandwidth scheme uses up to 12 separate wires, each transferring data at
2.5 Gb per second.  Standard configurations use 1, 4, or 12 wires for up to
30-Gb-per-second transfer rates.  The technology provides a faster, more
reliable method to connect storage and network devices to servers and to
connect servers to each other, providing up to three levels of redundancy.
Besides increasing the transfer data rate, the benefits of the InfiniBand
architecture are twofold:  First, it removes the I/O subsystems from inside
the main system unit, allowing suppliers to design rack systems with much
higher density form factors; and second, its inherent design will allow
bandwidth to increase as the number of I/O ports increases — a shortcoming
with today’s prevailing server I/O technology.
The InfiniBand architecture consists of the following three main components
(Figure 1):
1. Host channel adapter (HCA):  The HCA resides in a host, i.e., server,
   and provides the primary processor to the InfiniBand connection point.
   The HCA connects the host node to the IBA fabric, offloading much of the
   communications processing workload from the CPU and operating system.
2. Target channel adapter (TCA):  The TCA provides the termination for the
   InfiniBand architecture fabric at the target.  The TCA acts as an
   intermediate physical layer between IBA-based data traffic and more
   traditional I/O controllers for other required subsystems such as
   Ethernet, SCSI (small computer system interface), and Fibre Channel (FC).
3. Switches and routers:  IBA switches and routers provide the central
   connection points so that multiple TCAs can be connected to the
   controlling HCA.  While switches handle traffic within a subnet (a user-
   defined I/O domain), routers handle traffic between subnets.
Much of the intelligence in an InfiniBand system is embedded on the
adapters that attach nodes to the I/O fabric.  Each adapter type offloads
transport functionality from the host using an InfiniBand processor that is
responsible for organizing I/O messages into packets for network-oriented
data delivery.  As a result, the host operating system and the server
processor are relieved of this task.  Note that this is an extreme contrast
from what occurs in TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet
Protocol) communication.
The key advantages of the InfiniBand architecture are:
A single IBA card in the server is required for I/O and clustering,
eliminating the need for communications and storage cards;
Only a single connection is needed to the IBA switch for each server, IP
network, or SAN.  Redundancy is as simple as duplicating the connections to
another IBA switch;
The Virtual Lanes feature allows the multiplexing of logical traffic with
Quality of Service on the same physical link.  Every switch can act as a
QoS director or as a leaf switch without subnet management;
IBA solves inside-the-server-box I/O connectivity and bandwidth limitations
as well as providing external storage and communications connectivity and
bandwidth.

InfiniBand or PCI (Peripheral Component Interconnect)?

Introduced in the early 1990s, PCI technology delivered a newer, faster I/O
connectivity interface standard for PC users and component manufacturers.
It ushered in a long period of wide industry acceptance of a single
standard, resulting in greater stability, implementation simplicity, and
better product selection.  PCI’s attributes promised it a long life.
However, a lot has changed in a decade.  Today, PCI is used as:
1. The specification standard for interconnecting system onboard
   components, e.g., video graphics, Ethernet, and storage controllers; and
2. An I/O interconnection bus standard with a 133Mbps bandwidth for I/O
   suppliers to build storage adapters such as Fibre Channel and SCSI (Small
   Computer System Interface), network adapters such as Ethernet and Gigabit
   Ethernet, and video graphics controllers (recently moving from PCI-based
   to AGP (Accelerated Graphics Port)-based interconnects).
Early discussions in the mid-1990s among industry leaders such as Intel,
IBM, Compaq, and HP (Hewlett-Packard) began to address the growing concerns
around performance, availability, and manageability requirements that the
PCI shared bus structure’s limitations would not be able to satisfy (
particularly for large data centers.  This issue rose to the forefront
following the Internet boom that began in 1999, resulting in an
unprecedented explosion in I/O traffic with the rapid growth in e-Commerce
and the expanding requirements of remote storage and server clustering.
PCI-X and PCI-X 2.0, while offering incremental improvements, are also

Figure 1:  InfiniBand Architecture

                                    [pic]

                                           Source:  Aberdeen Group, May 2002
inadequate and will not be able to satisfy long-term data center
connectivity needs.  3GIO is another serial architecture supported by the
PCI-SIG and touted to be the PCI replacement starting in 2004.
IBA addresses the problem of inadequate I/O bandwidth using the PCI
standard.  But IBA is not intended to replace PCI as an interconnect for
system board-level components.  Instead, InfiniBand will coexist with PCI,
extending a server’s I/O capability and performance  first in 2002 by
hosting adapters (HCAs) that plug into existing PCI slots in a server, and
in late 2003 when server suppliers begin to deliver InfiniBand-enabled
systems with the InfiniBand HCA in silicon on the system board.   In this
capacity, IBA will provide a highly scalable, highly available alternative,
connecting servers to storage and IP within a datacenter.   For example,
InfiniBand is good for establishing high-speed connections between servers
and storage systems such as SANs (storage area networks), or to WAN
routers.  It is also good for joining computers into “clusters” that can
share loads and continue running even if an individual machine fails.
Another critical design limitation of PCI prevents distance separation
between the I/O bus and the memory controller.  That results in the scope
of the I/O bus being limited to the confines of the server chassis.
InfiniBand, however, allows server manufacturers to decouple the processing
complex and the I/O controller, leading to — among other things — highly
dense server designs that exclude I/O adapter cards from the chassis.
Companies such as Compaq, Dell, IBM and Sun see InfiniBand as a way to make
today’s super-slim blade servers even slimmer by separating computer
components into different units in a rack cabinet.

Existing I/O Infrastructures

Today’s I/O infrastructures are underscored by several key protocols in use
today.  A protocol is a set of rules and conventions used to impose a
standardized, structured language for the communication between multiple
parties.  For example, a protocol might define the order in which
information is exchanged between two parties. In fact, a data exchange can
only take place between two computers using the same protocol.  These key
protocols can be divided into the following two main I/O target categories:
     1. Networking:  Networking allows computer-to-computer
        interconnectivity and is responsible for moving data from one to
        the other.
     2. Storage:  SCSI is ubiquitous in the IT world as the main server to
        storage connectivity protocol.  Fibre Channel is the other storage
        protocol, so far, limited to implementation in large enterprise
        data centers due to its high cost when compared to SCSI and the
        complexity in maintaining it.
Figure 2 shows an example of how this existing I/O infrastructure is
implemented in today’s data center.  In this diagram, each different device
requires a separate I/O controller PCI adapter card and a separate cable
connecting that device to the controller.
In addition to existing protocols, several new protocols are being
considered to enable a new range of high-performance I/O capabilities based
on Ethernet and TCP/IP.  To avoid compatibility issues similar to what is
found in today’s Fibre Channel, the purpose of the compatibility and
interoperability work group (CIWG) of the IBTA is to ensure the ability for
diverse vendor products to interoperate and ( just as importantly ( coexist
with interconnects in today’s data center.

IP over InfiniBand

The network layer protocol known as the Internet Protocol is the common
thread that holds the entire Internet together.  It is responsible for
moving data from one computer to another.  IP is the standard that defines
the manner in which the network layers of two hosts interact.  These hosts
may be on the same network or reside on physically distinct heterogeneous
networks.  When data is sent or received, e.g., using e-mail or a Web page,
the message is divided into small chunks called packets.  Because a message
is divided into a number of packets, each packet can be sent by a different
route and arrive at its destination out of order.  The Internet Protocol
simply delivers these packets.  It is up to another protocol, the
Transmission Control Protocol, to put them back in the right order.  TCP/IP
is important because it plays a key role in today’s local- and wide-area IT
communications infrastructure.  Firmly entrenched in the IT world, TCP/IP
is the standard protocol on which the Internet build-out and continuing
expansion is based.

Figure 2:  Existing Server I/O Architecture

[pic]

                                           Source:  Aberdeen Group, May 2002
Software that supports IP over InfiniBand enables standard TCP/IP
connections over the InfiniBand fabric ― preserving investments in existing
data centers.  That also means that existing applications currently using
TCP/IP can work over InfiniBand without modifications.  Because InfiniBand
uses IP as a native network layer protocol for wide area network (WAN)
connections, it allows transparent connectivity through an existing IP
infrastructure.
A major benefit of IBA is the potential reduction of server processing of
TCP/IP traffic.  An IBA router will communicate at IBA speeds to the host
server, terminating LAN and WAN TCP/IP traffic, while freeing server CPU
cycles.

Storage over InfiniBand

Currently, there are multiple storage network topologies and protocols that
are widely deployed in today’s data center.  These include the following:
    • SCSI:  The SCSI standard was introduced about 20 years ago, providing
      the first physical separation of storage devices from the host
      computer.  Since its introduction, the SCSI standard has been revised
      several times, providing increased bus speeds and longer connection
      distances from the host and expanding the number of storage devices
      that could be attached.  The scalability restrictions of a SCSI
      parallel interface, however, experience the same inherent limitations
      associated with today’s I/O bus-channel architecture.
    • SANs:  FC-based SANs provide a high-speed physical layer and low-
      latency link mechanism optimized for storage I/O, delivering a
      significant performance advantage over parallel SCSI.  Fibre Channel
      technology was the IT industry’s first attempt to break free of the
      scale, performance, and device link distance limitations of parallel
      SCSI.  Fibre Channel represents an early network storage I/O protocol,
      which provides superior performance levels in the form of a reliable,
      high-speed, low-latency network transport.
    • Network attached storage (NAS):  NAS-based storage can be likened to
      earlier file servers where servers connected via Ethernet on a LAN
      managed storage access through IP-based requests.  These devices,
      called NAS appliances, use finely tuned hardware and software to
      optimize data access.  NAS appliances are a cost-effective way to
      manage and share files.
As mentioned earlier, today's approach to storage uses a separate interface
per server to access each of the varied storage platforms (Figure 2).  This
framework is costly, lacks scalability and balance, and creates complexity
associated with hardware, software, and skilled resources necessary to
deploy and maintain this environment.  According to research conducted by
Aberdeen Group, the fabric topology that IBA is based on has emerged as the
preferred architecture for storage networking.  Fibre Channel is a good
example of a network-based topology in use today, and discussions around
the emerging iSCSI protocol is another example of this storage architecture
trend.  A fabric configuration uses a switch to aggregate multiple
topologies into a unified network that theoretically consists of millions
of devices.  The result is a high-performance system that consists of a
virtually unlimited number of I/O channels, all of which are capable of
using the full bandwidth provided by the link.

I/O Routing

Looking ahead, it is apparent that many new protocol choices will become
available in the storage and system networking worlds.  As a result, it
will become increasingly important to provide routing technology that
allows data to be exchanged between disparate I/O protocols.  At the
simplest level are InfiniBand architecture products that act as bridges
between parallel SCSI, Fibre Channel, and, later, InfiniBand-based I/O.
IBA is designed to preserve today’s classes of I/O structure while allowing
IT managers to respond to the demand for extending storage-networking
protocols over long distances.

Routing SCSI and Fibre Channel I/O Protocols

The majority of today’s storage applications implement a parallel SCSI for
server-storage interconnects in existing I/O infrastructures.  Connecting
these devices to a storage network-based InfiniBand architecture requires
an I/O switching or routing device to convert parallel SCSI or FC traffic
to the network protocol.  This approach will allow users to preserve
investments in existing hardware.  With minimal disruption, enterprises can
begin the transition to InfiniBand while preparing their data center for
some of the new network-based I/O storage of the future.  Key suppliers of
this switching and routing hardware include InfiniCon, Voltaire,
InfiniSwitch, and QLogic.

InfiniBand for Server Scaling

IBA will support server scaling to a degree never before possible.  As a
result, new—and likely disruptive—server architectures are on the horizon.
The two most important  server capabilities are clustering and server
blades.  Both will benefit from the use of InfiniBand technology within the
server box itself.

Clustering for Performance and High Availability

Clustering has existed for two decades in the form of performance
clustering and high-availability clustering.  Performance clustering
spreads a workload over multiple servers, scaling processing power within
the limits of I/O and interprocessor message-passing bandwidth.  IBA will
provide a major improvement in I/O bandwidth and in the reduction of
message-passing latencies.  As a result, the cost of performance-oriented
clustering will decline and throughput will improve considerably.  High-
availability clustering is designed to recover from hardware or software
failures.  The state of processing for 1 to N servers is saved on a backup
server(s), which can be doing useful work until it is called upon after a
failure.  Because so much application state information must be moved from
server to server, the high bandwidth and low latency of InfiniBand will
dramatically lower the performance overhead of clustering, encouraging more
enterprises to run more applications in a high-availability 24/7 mode.

Server Blades for Dense Computing and Consolidation

A server blade is a CPU, memory and an I/O connection.  With today’s
microprocessors and dense packaging, a blade can fit in the volume of a
paperback book.  But a blade package has room for only a couple of disk
drives, so communications and I/O cabling are huge issues in configuring
dozens of blades in a rack-mount cabinet.  Moreover, if these blade servers
are to communicate with each other in a clustered architecture, server-to-
server communications bandwidth and latency become performance limiters.
Using an InfiniBand switch within a server cabinet solves the bandwidth and
latency issues while eliminating a cabling rat’s nest.  Each processor
blade has one or more HCA connections to an (redundant) IBA switch located
in the cabinet.  Thus, each blade requires only one IBA and one power
cable.  As a result, very dense server racks become practical and cost
effective—while enabling IBA’s huge bandwidth.  Note that by using the IBA
fabric, blades can easily be specialized for specific uses—computing, I/O,
and communications protocol handling.
Figure 3 illustrates a reference design for a blade-server rack containing
12 processing blades with a redundant switched backplane and common power.
Aberdeen Group sees all of the major computer suppliers offering IBA-
enabled blades in 2003.

Figure 3:  Blade Server Rack With Integral InfiniBand Switch

[pic]

                              Source:  Mellanox Technologies, Inc., May 2002

Deploying InfiniBand in the Data Center

Earlier sections of this paper described elements of existing I/O
architecture and put them into context of which events that are occurring
in the industry are shaping emerging I/O architecture trends.  As with any
new technology, there will be a planned transition to IBA as the new data-
center systems-I/O interconnect standard where IBA-based I/O and PCI-based
I/O will coexist for a time.  To understand how this transition could take
place, the following discussion considers deployment of several key
components into an existing I/O infrastructure to build an InfiniBand
fabric in a data center.  Figure 3 highlights a time line of events
occurring relative to the delivery of key components for the InfiniBand
architecture.  This schedule of events strongly suggests that enterprises
need to begin planning today for this transition.

Adapters

As explained, there are two kinds of adapters ― HCAs and TCAs.  In late
2002 or early 2003, both types of adapters are expected to be available
from suppliers that include Adaptec, Agilent, Emulex, IBM, Qlogic and
Voltaire.  Initial HCAs are designed to plug into a standard PCI slot (
easily enabling existing data center servers for the InfiniBand fabric.  In
2003, leading manufacturers such as Compaq/HP, Dell, IBM, and Unisys plan
to deliver new enterprise servers with the HCA embedded into the system.
Because a single — or dual, if redundancy is required — HCA can replace
multiple PCI-based I/O controllers in a server, enterprises will benefit
immediately by eliminating the complexity of wiring each server
independently to multiple networks, e.g., SCSI/RAID, Fibre Channel SAN, and
Ethernet NAS.
TCAs are embedded within devices, such as storage arrays, that respond to
I/O requests.  The first introduction of TCAs will be designed to support
only what is required to facilitate fabric interaction and any
functionality that is specific to the device in which it is embedded.  For
example, TCAs for storage arrays will likely embed parallel SCSI
functionality to allow interaction with disk-drive interfaces along with
bridging functionality to allow interaction with the InfiniBand fabric.
Initial deployments of these adapters will most likely be located in new
InfiniBand switches and routers.  This design will facilitate bridging
between native InfiniBand storage protocol and legacy protocol devices
already existing in the data center.  Many of the same vendors delivering
HCAs and switches and routers will also supply the TCA market.

Figure 4:  Key Technology Events Related to the InfiniBand Architecture


                                                                       [pic]

                                           Source:  Aberdeen Group, May 2002

Switches and Routers

The role of the switch within the InfiniBand architecture is to route
packets among the members of the subnet, a defined group or domain of
devices within the data center.  The role of the router is to route packets
between subnets within the global domain of the IT enterprise.  Because
switches can also be subnet managers, they maintain a set of instructions
that define the QoS (quality of service) characteristics of the subnet.
Vendors that have announced products or that plan to announce products in
this category include IBM, InfiniCon, InfiniSwitch, Qlogic and Voltaire.
Figure 5 depicts a late-2002 data center implementation of InfiniBand.  In
this example, multiple PCI-based I/O controllers within each server (
SCSI/RAID, Fibre Channel, and Ethernet ( are replaced with one (or two for
redundancy) HCAs.  An InfiniBand cable then connects each server (plugging
into each HCA) to an InfiniBand fabric switch.  The InfiniBand switch acts
as a bridge between servers and existing data center I/O devices, e.g.,
RAID units, SANs, WAN routers, etc., allowing coexistence of multiple I/O
protocols such as IBA, SCSI, Fibre Channel, and IP.
The IBA framework allows data centers to take a phased approach to
implementing the InfiniBand fabric while minimizing disruption to their
existing environment.  Critical to an effective transition plan, the
InfiniBand architecture allows support

Figure 5:  InfiniBand Server Architecture — Early Transition Phase in 2002
[pic]
                                           Source:  Aberdeen Group, May 2002
for existing I/O infrastructures while also providing a bridge for future
I/O expansion and flexibility across this architecture.  Data centers,
therefore, are able to add immediate value ( introducing improved access,
higher availability, and comprehensive administrative capabilities to their
existing operation.

Early Enterprise Adopters Are Very Positive About InfiniBand

Aberdeen Group is not alone in foreseeing that InfiniBand will
revolutionize data center architectures.  Table 1 highlights some of the
key benefits derived from the InfiniBand architecture.  Our own analysis is
bolstered with field research comments by early-adopter enterprises that
are currently evaluating InfiniBand:
Expectations of reduced Total Cost of Ownership for database clusters on
the order of 50%, and lower I/O management costs on the order of 70%
savings;
Reduced points of failure, reduced hardware failures, and ease of
configuring fully redundant systems—combined with improved ease of
maintenance and component replacement;
Marked improvement in manageability as the number of proprietary
interconnect technologies is reduced;
Near linear scaling of transaction processing, database applications and
some technical applications due to reduced overhead in clustering and
server-to-server message passing;
The ability to create very dense server compute farms for Internet edge
traffic, research, or business intelligence is attractive to numerous
commercial, education, and government organizations;
TCP/IP protocol offload from servers to IBA routers will free up database
server capacity, stretching processor- or box-based application software
licenses further without the need to pay for software upgrades;

Table 1:  InfiniBand Architecture Benefit Highlights


|Feature                  |Benefits                                |
|Enables a single port to |Multiple different cables in today’s    |
|satisfy all server I/O   |enterprise rack cabinets are replaced   |
|traffic  by carrying     |with a single common cable per          |
|storage, network, and    |server/storage unit, eliminating        |
|server cluster traffic.  |hundreds of cables; and                 |
|                         |Sharable I/O system creates a common    |
|                         |point of connectivity, reducing the     |
|                         |number of direct server                 |
|                         |connections/cables, which reduces the   |
|                         |number of I/O adapters required, and    |
|                         |lowering overall costs.                 |
|Eliminates the need for  |Server manufacturers can eliminate      |
|multiple I/O adapters in |unnecessary legacy components, reducing |
|the server               |system cost and delivering servers with |
|                         |a much smaller form factor;             |
|                         |Smaller server form factors translate   |
|                         |into lower data center costs due to     |
|                         |higher rack optimization and greater    |
|                         |space efficiency; and                   |
|                         |Enterprises can upgrade or replace      |
|                         |server hardware without disturbing I/O  |
|                         |configuration.                          |
|Scalable I/O performance |In PCI, the bus bandwidth of 500MB/s is |
|                         |shared by all devices; with IBA, each   |
|                         |link has a minimum connection speed of  |
|                         |500MB/s, scaling to 6GB/s.  An IBA      |
|                         |server can have multiple, high-speed I/O|
|                         |channels for storage or communications  |
|                         |uses, elimination I/O as a bottleneck.  |
|Decouples the server     |Provides flexibility in placement of    |
|processor complex from   |servers and I/O controllers within the  |
|the I/O and extends the  |data center and in the ability to add   |
|distance between CPU and |processing power separate from adding   |
|I/O controllers from     |additional storage;                     |
|inches to kilometers     |IBA’s network protocol feature allows   |
|                         |global routing capability within data   |
|                         |packets, supporting WAN storage         |
|                         |placement; and                          |
|                         |Server performance increases because I/O|
|                         |tasks are offloaded onto the IBA fabric.|


                                           Source:  Aberdeen Group, May 2002
Aberdeen Conclusions

The movement behind InfiniBand is gaining traction, whereby an old I/O
architecture is replaced with a next-generation scalable fabric
alternative.  However, the movement to InfiniBand will not occur overnight.
 It requires careful planning and a transition approach that can begin
enterprise production in 2003.
InfiniBand is well positioned to become the transport of choice for server
networks that support inter-processor communications and server clustering,
because it has achieved broad support in the computing industry as an open-
standard I/O messaging transport.  The goal of the InfiniBand architecture
is to define a broad set of connectivity topologies whereby I/O can be
scaled on an as needed basis.  However, because it is the newest I/O
transport that has been defined by the computing industry, early
deployments will first occur in large enterprise and research data centers
where the greatest need exists for expanded I/O bandwidth and performance
headroom.
As IT planners prepare their data center to address growing storage
capacity needs, it is important that the InfiniBand architecture allows the
incremental addition of capacity and performance in a cost-effective manner
as they attempt to address scalability requirements.  IT managers should
look to early InfiniBand hardware and software to deliver immediate value.
First-generation hardware and software are expected to become available
later in 2002.  IT planners, therefore, who are looking toward a single
networking topology and must have a scalable architecture that also
considers the needs of new and rich content requirements should begin to
evaluate InfiniBand in 2002 — and move to phased deployment in 2003.  In
any event, planners should consider how and when InfiniBand will first
augment and then replace existing—often proprietary—I/O technologies.
