AberdeenGrou
p
Electronic 
Commerce:
1998 
Practice 
Summary
May 1998
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
One Boston Place
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
USA
Telephone: 617 723 7890
Fax: 617 723 7897
www.aberdeen.com
ii
AberdeenGroup 
Aberdeen Group, Inc.
Aberdeen Group is a Boston-based, computer and 
communications consulting and market-research 
organization.
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select group 
of domestic and international clients.    Each requires a 
combination of strategic advice and pragmatic, experience-
based action plans.    Assignments range from corporate and 
product positioning and organizational planning to in-depth 
market segment research.    Aberdeen consults on mergers 
and acquisitions, corporate positioning and investor 
relations, transaction-processing benchmarks, and has 
special expertise in software and midrange    computer 
markets.
In carrying out assignments, Aberdeen uses a proprietary, 
comprehensive, analytical framework providing fresh 
insight into the complex future of computing and 
communications, both from a technological and a market- 
dynamics perspective.    Aberdeen also offers retainer-fee 
programs to a group of continuing clients.
Aberdeen principals and staff are recognized industry 
figures with hundreds of years of combined high-tech 
industry, research and financial community experience 
among them.    They are quoted extensively in industry trade 
and business publications.    Each is a frequent conference 
and seminar speaker.
In addition to client-related research and consulting, 
Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, Aberdeen 
Viewpoints and Profiles, which summarize its analysis and 
research findings.
Information contained in this publication has been obtained from 
sources we believe to be reliable, but is not warranted by us.    Opinions 
reflect judgment at the time and are subject to change without notice.
iii
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The trademarks and registered trademarks of the corporations 
mentioned in this publication are the property of their respective 
holders.
Warning:    This publication is protected by United States copyright law 
and international treaties.    Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents 
of this publication are copyrighted by Aberdeen Group, Inc., and may not 
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means without prior written consent.    Unauthorized 
reproduction or distribution of this publication, or any portion of it, may 
result in severe civil and criminal penalties, and will be prosecuted to the 
maximum extent necessary to protect the rights of the publisher. 
© 1998 Aberdeen Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
iv
AberdeenGroup 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (EC) PRACTICE
VII
Description, Focus and Benefits
vii
Strategic Market Questions
viii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1
Market Size
3
Aberdeen Market Segmentation
3
Building an InterNetworked Enterprise Requires a Solid Foundation
4
The Unique Attributes of the Web Channel
5
Catch The Wave. Ride The Wave. Enjoy The Wave.
6
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
7
Marketing and Sales-to-Order EC
7
Intranet and Internet Procurement
8
Electronic and Internet Commerce Outsourcing
10
Advertising and Promotion in the Virtual Channel Grow Vigorously
11
UNDERSTANDING THE ELECTRONIC COMMERCE  REVOLUTION14
A Time of Opportunity, A Time of Risk
14
The Internet is Providing Ubiquitous Connectivity
14
Defining Electronic Commerce
15
Segmenting the EC Market
17
Marketing Process Automation
18
Sales-to-Order Process Automation
19
Procurement and Purchasing Process Automation:
21
Distribution and Logistics Management Process Automation:
22
The Changing Technology Supplier Landscape
23
How Internet Advertising Fits into Electronic Commerce
24
v
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The Benefits of EC are Compelling
25
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES: CATCH THE WAVE; RIDE THE WAVE27
EC:  The Killer App for the Internet and Objects
27
Balancing the Channels in The InterNetworked Enterprise
27
Electronic Commerce Evolution:  Of Darwin and Deja Vu…
28
The Big Picture Questions for EC Technology Buyers
29
Build, Buy, or Outsource?
31
What are the Important Attributes to Evaluate in Comparing  EC Applications?
32
EC Technology Supplier Success Factors
34
THE SUPPLIERS OF EC APPLICATIONS AND MIDDLEWARE
36
ADSmart Corporation
37
Accipiter, Inc.
37
AdKnowledge, Inc. (Formerly ClickOver and Focalink)
38
Ariba Technologies, Inc.
38
Art Technology Group
39
Aspect Development, Inc.
40
Bellcore ¾ Soliant Internet Systems
40
BroadVision, Inc.
41
BurstMedia
41
Commerce One, Inc.
42
Connect, Inc.
43
CyberCash, Inc.
43
DigiCash, Inc.
44
DoubleClick, Inc.
44
EC Verify, Inc.
45
vi
AberdeenGroup 
ELEKOM Corporation
45
First Virtual Holdings Incorporated
46
Fulcrum Technologies, Inc.
47
GE Information Services
47
Harbinger Corporation
48
IBM Corporation
49
iCat Corporation
50
IMGIS Inc
51
Intelligent Interactions Corporation
51
Inex Corporation
52
Intershop Communications, Inc.
53
InterWorld Technology Corporation
53
Mercantec, Inc.
54
Microsoft Corporation
54
NetGravity, Inc.
55
Netscape Communications Corporation.
56
OneSoft
57
Open Market, Inc.
57
Oracle Corporation
58
Real Media Inc.
59
Requisite Technology
59
SpaceWorks, Inc.
60
Sterling Commerce, Inc.
60
The EC Company
61
vii
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
TRADE’ex Electronic Commerce Systems, Inc.
61
TSI Software, Inc..
62
US West !nterprise Network Services (!nteract Network)
62
VeriFone, Inc
63
24/7 Media
63
7Software
64
viii
AberdeenGroup 
Preface
Electronic Commerce (EC) Practice 
Description, Focus and Benefits
Aberdeen’s Electronic Commerce Markets Research practice 
observes and analyzes the technical evolution and market 
dynamics of all forms of Electronic Commerce (EC).    Aberdeen 
analysis is provided for both transaction-oriented applications and 
services based on I/P protocols as well as messaging applications 
based on EDI protocols — including both Business-to-Consumer 
and Business-to-Business suppliers.    Our practice aids end-user 
organizations in the development of strategic and tactical plans 
that include EC, and assists suppliers in developing their product 
positioning and product marketing strategies.
Aberdeen believes that Electronic Commerce reflects a logical 
evolution of core enterprise business processes and the 
information systems which support these processes.    Electronic 
Commerce is redefining both internal and external business 
processes based on a self-service, rich-content paradigm which 
includes bi-directional interactions with trading partners and 
customers.    Our research spans a broad range of business process 
automation which includes:

Virtual channels for sales; 

Procurement; 

Customer service; 

Content publishing; 

Distribution and logistics; 

Collaborative marketing; and 

Application of cross-organization advanced planning 
technologies. 
The way in which organizations respond to the opportunities 
afforded by EC will be an important determinant of their market 
competitiveness in future years. Aberdeen’s Electronic Commerce 
research is closely supported by the Aberdeen research teams 
focused on Internet Application Architectures, Internet Security, 
and Enterprise Business Applications.
ix
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Strategic Market Questions

Should organizations develop EC applications internally, 
purchase third party software, or outsource their 
requirements to a Commerce Service Provider (CSP)? 

Should EC investment be targeted at EDI or at establishing 
virtual channels using the Internet, Extranets, or Intranets? 

What product architectures are being employed by EC 
automation suppliers, and how do these architectures impact 
application scalability and manageability? 

What are the most important standards for EC? Should 
companies build their own EC infrastructure, purchase third 
party "point solution" EC applications, or invest in an 
integrated EC application and infrastructure architecture? 

What product features and architectures differentiate the 
many suppliers of EC automation and how are these features 
important to end-user organizations? 
This Aberdeen Group Practice Summary is a deliverable in a 
comprehensive service that includes Aberdeen published research 
and customized professional services aimed at executives who 
must make strategic business decisions regarding Information 
Technology.
x
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter One
Executive Summary
Electronic Commerce (EC) is the term used to describe the 
automation of the full commerce cycle between organizations 
(“business-to-business EC”) or between an organization and 
individual consumers (“business-to-consumer EC”).      The objective 
of EC is quite simple:    to promote the instant exchange of 
information between businesses (or businesses and their 
customers) and improve the accuracy of that exchange.    This is a 
broad concept which includes the exchange of a wide variety of 
information between businesses and customers using Information 
Technology (IT) automation.    Internet Commerce (IC) is the term 
used to describe EC activities which take place on the Internet or 
virtual private networks based on Internet Protocol (I/P) 
technology ¾ i.e., Extranets or Intranets. 
EC integrates elements of business process and    technology.    It can 
take on many different forms, all of which reflect the automation of 
business transactions and work flows between physically discrete 
organizations or between an organization and consumers.    In 
different contexts and forms, EC may:
1. automate sales, marketing, order-to-purchase and/or 
procurement processes via computer network, providing 
an alternative, “virtual” sales and marketing channel, 
often utilizing a self-service process model;
2. deliver customer support service via remote computer 
network, frequently utilizing a self-service process model;
3. exchange business planning information between trading 
partners, establishing communication directly between 
their respective internal information systems to automate 
a broad range of manufacturing requirement planning 
(MRP) and enterprise resource planning (ERP) processes;
4. automate product distribution and delivery via computer 
networks of goods which can be represented digitally ¾    
such as knowledge bases, part design data files, computer 
software, and graphical images and multi-media; 
1
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
5. expedite procurement by centralizing supplier catalogues 
and automating the supplier/part search and ordering 
processes;
6. automate the order-to-payment process between 
companies (or between companies and consumers), 
including the transfer of funds via banking or financial 
intermediaries
The rise of the Internet has created a new channel ¾ frequently 
described as “the virtual channel” ¾    connecting businesses and 
consumers, supporting a range of commerce activity in unique and 
revolutionary ways.    The physical infrastructure of this channel is 
the shared, network resource of the Internet, operating in 
combination with private networks.    The fact that the 
infrastructure of the virtual channel is shared makes it 
fundamentally different from other channels (e.g. a direct sales 
channel) since the infrastructure is shared and not directly 
controlled by the organizations using it.
The Internet provides a business channel with unique attributes:    
the ability to deliver rich, layered content;    the degree of recipient 
control over the content of the interaction; the support for two-way 
communication; the low variable cost structure of channel 
implementation and management; and its reach beyond traditional 
geographic and time-based boundaries to the world at large. 
The rise of the Internet provides a unique opportunity to every 
business.    It enables a new channels for sales, marketing, customer 
service, and planning    ¾ the business processes which connect a 
company to its customers, suppliers, and partners.    These channels 
have different qualitative attributes and markedly different 
economics.    They enable new, fundamentally different business 
processes and the opportunity to improve profitability of existing 
processes through reduced costs, improved customer service and 
increased market share.
The challenge facing every business today is to effectively exploit 
the unique characteristics of the Internet ¾ and virtual networks 
based on Internet technology ¾ to gain competitive advantage.    
The imperative to master the Internet channel is real; 
organizations who are able to effectively integrate the Electronic 
Commerce channel into their businesses may be positioned to 
achieve market share and market dominance by offering 
fundamentally superior qualitative or economic value propositions 
to customers and partners. 
2
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The majority of large corporations missed the first wave of 
Electronic Commerce in late 1995, when the competitive 
environment was lax.    In 1998, the online competition is fierce and 
fleet-footed companies use the fluidity of the environment to 
quickly outflank competitors. 
Market Size
Aberdeen believes that value of Internet consumer sales will grow 
to between $10 billion and $15 billion by 2003, and business-to-
business sales will be exponentially larger. 
In 1998, Aberdeen finds that greater than 20% of households access 
online services — and approximately 50% of such users access it 
daily.    Finally, Aberdeen expects 8% to 12% of households will buy 
online in 1998 — the Internet is already a mass market. However, 
90% of all Web revenues are enjoyed by fewer than 10% of Web 
businesses and there are fewer than 50 Internet users per 
commercially registered site, which suggests that most business 
sites experience only a trickle of traffic.
Unfortunately, there is no well-established way to market products 
online.    Smart marketers will not argue about which online 
marketing method to use, but what mix of channels to employ and 
what tone to take.    It is becoming clear that shifting customer 
interaction to the Internet channel ¾ with a lower cost of service ¾  
is one of the most significant benefits of investment in EC.    Multi-
channel distribution, purchasing and customer service strategies 
are inherently complex ¾ and demand integration across channels 
at the underlying IT infrastructure level.
Noah comes to mind.    The time to build an ark is before it starts to 
rain.    Wait, and you may not be ready in time.      Aberdeen has 
found forward-thinking companies that exploit, deliberately or 
accidentally, the Internet's amazing flexibility to offer unique value 
that is either impossible or impractical to offer off-line via 
conventional channel
Aberdeen Market Segmentation
Aberdeen’s coverage of Electronic Commerce markets is divided 
into five areas of research practice (which span three research 
teams):

Internet Procurement (Electronic Commerce Markets)

Internet Sales (Electronic Commerce Markets)
3
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 

Internet Marketing (Electronic Commerce Markets)

Manufacturing Supply Chain Planning and Management 
(Enterprise Applications)

Electronic Commerce Systems Integration Consulting 
Services (Professional Services)
Aberdeen currently    monitors the products and business 
performance of more than fifty independent application software 
suppliers, twenty CSP outsourcers, and ten professional services 
firms who are active in the EC and EC markets. The first three areas 
listed above are the subject of the remainder of this Report.
Building an InterNetworked Enterprise Requires a Solid 
Foundation
The opportunity of EC has brought forth scores of new, young 
companies.    Market consolidation is inevitable. Organizations 
should recognize that they are building a new application 
infrastructure and should be concerned with baseline architecture 
as well as application functions, lest they create new “silos of 
automation” which will leave them with a new legacy environment 
 islands of automation which do not inter-operate, and are    limited 
in their ability to support cross-application business processes. 
Selecting suppliers with staying power becomes an important 
attribute in product evaluation.    Deep pockets are an obvious asset 
in every settling market.    Aberdeen believes that several not-so-
obvious attributes will also impact who emerges from the pack of 
new EC suppliers to garner significant market share:
7. the ability to forge successful business and technical 
relationships with the major Enterprise and Sales Force 
Automation (ERP and SFA) applications vendors; these are the 
companies with software to support and automate broader 
enterprise process models who also support parallel 
channels; 
8. strong technical integration to underlying systems software 
infrastructure     including the operating system, web server, 
message server, transaction monitor, security and directory 
server services;    this provides a technical advantage that can 
translate into robust performance attributes of scalability, 
reliability, security, and authentication; and
9. support for both EDI and IC as well as emerging inter-
operability standards associated with each technology;    this 
increases the likely size of the automated training 
4
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
community  and the benefits which can be derived from that 
automation. 
10.leverage the content delivery, accessibility and personalization 
attributes of the Internet to improve the quality of service 
experienced by end users and leverage the cost, spatial and 
temporal characteristics of the virtual channel.
Recent Aberdeen research has concluded that Internet Commerce 
and object development architectures are a natural match.    A 
number of business processes are common across IC applications, 
including:    user registration; application security; transaction 
security; IC transaction processing management; file translation; 
catalogue management and search capabilities. The opportunity for 
certain shared baseline functionality which crosses the IC 
application environment, combined with the need for extensive 
systems integration with legacy systems, is well matched by object 
development architectures.    Similarly, the distributed object model 
enables application connectivity between trading partners 
connected with the lowest common denominator of software and 
communications protocols:    the browser connected to the Internet. 
The Unique Attributes of the Web Channel
The Internet poses new rules, challenges, and opportunities to the 
advertising industry.    Having grown relatively independent of 
other mediums, the Internet relies on only a small portion of 
traditional advertising methodology and process. The reason for 
this departure from traditional means is two fold.    First, the 
Internet allows advertisers to target prospects at the point of sale.    
The Internet is a transaction-capable medium which provides an 
advertiser with the opportunity to convert a web surfer to a 
prospect to a customer in one common environment.    
Furthermore, the Internet allows companies and advertisers to 
transcend geographic boundaries which have commonly thwarted 
their reach and growth.    With Internet transaction capabilities 
installed, small shops can potentially enjoy geographic selling areas 
as national or global chains ¾ although “being there” on the 
Internet carries no assurance that “they will come.”    However, the 
Internet holds the potential to tap a world market for traditionally 
regional players ¾ the greatest promise is in high-value specialty 
goods and services. 
Second, the Internet caters to an active population that has direct 
control over their media experience.    Each Internet user controls 
5
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
the speed and frequency with which they are presented 
information.    This navigation control allows users to work at their 
own pace, but also provides sites with insight as to what occurs 
within their pages.    With improvements in tracking and analysis 
technologies, sites can map a user’s actions on-line to determine 
their preferences and interests.    By targeting ads and promotions 
to users based on this data, companies hope to one day market to 
end users on a one-to-one basis directly at the point of sale.    
Aberdeen recognizes the ability to market to transaction-enabled 
prospects on a one-to-one bases as the dream of direct marketers, 
but the ability to truly perform this sort of function on a laser 
targeting basis is yet to be realized.
In order to help the industry reach improved ad targeting 
capabilities, advertising on the Internet has become a science 
rather than a random attempt to reach a target market.    Both sites 
and advertisers have embraced technologies for tracking and 
analyzing Internet trends, improved reporting capabilities, 
implemented user profiling and targeting tools, developed user 
tracking technologies, and demanded the development of real time 
ad management and placement tools from market ISVs.    Each of 
these technologies plays an important role in the advancement of 
the Internet advertising space which Aberdeen is confident will 
grow from $750 million in 1997 to well over $4.1 billion by the year 
2000.
Catch The Wave. Ride The Wave. Enjoy The Wave.
InterNetworked Enterprises are creating an automation 
infrastructure which leverages Internet technology to improve 
their fundamental internal and external business processes.      The 
economic equilibrium of these new processes is in continuous flux 
as enterprises and customers modify their behavior in response to 
the changing attributes of the products, services, and applications. 
The technologies which enable EC applications are still maturing.    
This creates risk for early adopters.    But Aberdeen research 
concludes that these risks can be effectively managed by 
organizations who understand the lessons of Information 
Technology history and align themselves with suppliers who:    (a) 
develop a coherent strategy based on a robust and flexible 
infrastructure for their EC initiatives; and (b) offer an integrated 
application environment supporting a diverse set of EC    
transactions and a wide range of open inter-operability standards. 
6
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The ability to effectively exploit Electronic Commerce technologies 
has already become a characteristic which fundamentally 
differentiates companies.    Aberdeen research concludes that EC 
capability will become an increasingly significant determinant of 
success in many sectors of the economy.    Those InterNetworked 
Enterprises which are able to exploit this opportunity  and improve 
their revenue, cost-competitiveness, and service quality  are 
positioning themselves with enduring marketing differentiation 
and value-add for their customers. 
The rise of the InterNetworked Enterprise creates    a unique 
challenge for many businesses:    tap the potential inherent in 
Electronic Commerce technology and reap its benefits.    Do it 
before  or with greater effectiveness than  your competitors;    fail 
to act and risk the Darwinian consequences of inaction in a rapidly 
changing environment.
7
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Two
Summary of Findings
Aberdeen research has identified certain characteristics that are 
shared by the early winners in the race to establish an effective 
Electronic Commerce presence on the WWW and using EDI.    Most 
significantly, the companies who have been successful in their EC 
initiatives seem to have engaged in outside-the-box thinking     
developing re-engineered business process models which, in some 
combination:
11.utilize self-service as a key element of sales and marketing, 
order-to-purchase, distribution, procurement and/or 
customer support processes;
12.allow trusted trading partners to directly access portions 
of core business systems ¾ or New EC applications linked 
in real time to core business systems ¾ across 
organizational boundaries, allowing those partners to: 
place orders; query order, account and shipment status; 
and provide planning and forecasting input into 
manufacturing and inventory planning;
13.provide real time, customer-controlled access to rich 
content ¾ complete and current market information, 
detailed product specifications, single and multi-vendor 
parts catalogues, and/or procurement requirements 
databases  combined with efficient search and decision 
support tools to improve the quality of in support of 
procurement and sales order-to-purchase decision 
processes; and,
14.deliver more complete and timely marketing and research 
data as input to strategic marketing, product planning, 
and production planning.
Marketing and Sales-to-Order EC
The business-to consumer market has been the most visible 
element of a rapidly maturing market.    It is burgeoning in 1998 
with startling rapidity.    Aberdeen research into B-to-C markets has 
recently concluded:
8
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
15.Much Enterprise-level investment in EC is being driven by 
fear ¾ rather than understanding of opportunity.    Many 
companies invest defensively ¾ to preserve market share ¾ 
rather than strategically ¾ to develop new markets.
9
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
16.The largest sales and marketing sites ¾ which were generally 
built on an in-house infrastructure in 1995-1997 ¾ are being 
migrated to ISV applications and EC foundation-ware in 1998. 
These early pioneers are discovering that scalability and 
maintainability are not secondary requirements.    Smaller 
and medium sized sites have always looked to the ISV market 
for EC application functionality. 
17.Effective integration with existing non-EC systems is 
necessary to optimize the value of the virtual channel.      
The need for integration is creating a shortage of skilled 
personnel to perform the integration services.    People 
resources remain the limiting factor for implementing 
electronic commerce systems. 
18.Consolidation in the market is inevitable.    There are 
many start-ups in the market drawn by the dramatic 
market growth projections.    Some consolidation is 
inevitable ¾ even as the rising tide lifts many boats. 
19.Decisions on EC technology represent important 
enterprise investments and must be managed to reflect 
this importance.    There exists a danger of recreating 
stove-piped application environments which mirror 
earlier IT history. 
20.Early adopters have, in many instances, felt the sting of 
life on the bleeding edge.    But merchant server software 
is maturing rapidly.    The level of satisfaction of 
companies embarking on EC in the last twelve months has 
increased substantially as the software has matured.    
Implementation times have been dramatically reduced 
over the course of the last year and a half. 
21.The maturation of their clustering products, their 
continuing delivery commerce-enabling middleware to 
their ISV partners, and their strong price-performance 
make Microsoft an increasingly potent force in the EC 
market. 
22.The largest pioneering EC companies are already re-
implementing a substantial part of their early EC 
investments as problems of scalability, maintainability 
and integration become more significant.    This trend 
suggests increasing importance of middleware 
10
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
foundations for EC applications ¾ and an increasing role 
for the companies which provide such middleware. 
Intranet and Internet Procurement
Aberdeen research suggests that automation of business-to-
business requisition-to-order and order-to-fulfillment processes 
represents the next most active electronic commerce sub-segment 
after sales and marketing automation.    Nearly every organization’s 
Income Statement reflects significant expenditures for goods and 
services  often referred to as Operating Resource Management 
(ORM) or Maintenance, Repair and Operations (MRO)  items which 
are purchased on expense accounts, corporate procurement or 
credit cards and which are not material inputs to the production 
process.      This is one of the few areas of operations which has yet 
to be effectively automated ¾ and controlled ¾    in many 
organizations.      ERP purchasing systems are designed for 
professional purchasing agents, not the general workforce.    And 
many purchasing systems are not particularly effective in 
supporting comparative shopping practices, parts substitution, and 
supplier consolidation ¾    especially for operating resource 
purchases. 
Internet Procurement applications extend corporate control over 
renegade purchasing, enable comparative buying practices, 
support supplier consolidation and the negotiation of leveraged 
purchasing relationships, improve planning accuracy throughout 
the supply chain, reduce the time required to complete 
transactions, and significantly lower the cost of transactions.      The 
benefit stream used to justify acquisition is very straight-forward:    
(a)    reduced administrative cost-per-transaction for each 
transaction shifted from paper to the virtual channel; (b) savings 
which reflect increased use of preferred suppliers and more 
favorable terms from those suppliers due to    supplier 
consolidation; and (c) savings derived from improved inventory 
practice based on    shortened procurement cycles.    These are 
potentially large numbers ¾ which are being used to justify 
investments ranging from a quarter of a million to five million 
dollars.    The ROI analysis often shows payback in less than twelve 
months with conservative assumptions. 
Key findings of our continuing research in this segment of the EC 
market include:
11
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
23.Catalog content represents a strategic asset to this market 
segment.    The suppliers of technology differ in their 
content management strategy.    There is an emerging 
value-added service of replicating, standardizing, 
categorizing and customizing catalog data. 
24.Integration with both internal business systems and 
external partner systems is essential to optimize the value 
of these systems.    The strategies for integration vary 
widely, relying on either real-time API’s or, more 
frequently, messaging interfaces.    There is increased 
value as this integration approaches real-time capability.
25.The strategy for managing work flow processing 
differentiates suppliers.    The underlying flexibility of 
their work flow engines, the openness of this capability, 
and the ability to integrate with pre-existing ERP work 
flow systems all influence the benefits ¾ and costs ¾ to 
the procuring organization.
26.The underlying middleware infrastructure has a 
significant impact on “the software abilities” ¾ scalability, 
maintainability, availability and performance ¾ as well as 
the ease of integration with internal and external 
applications.    If purchased as a “point solution,” 
organizations need to be wary of creating new “stovepipe” 
applications ¾ albeit I/P-enabled stovepipes.
27. Distribution strength ¾ particularly indirect channels ¾ 
is likely to play an important role in determining who the 
dominant suppliers will be in this segment of the market. 
Relationships with systems integrators will be important 
for both distribution and to provide capacity to manage 
the needed integration activities.
Electronic and Internet Commerce Outsourcing
Perhaps the single greatest change in the EC market in 1997 was 
the overwhelming realization that a few hundred thousand dollars 
is far too much for small and some medium sized businesses to 
spend on an EC solution.    Because so much of EC application 
software is production-oriented, and because it requires skills in 
short supply in the corporate IT organization, EC is a logical 
candidate for outsourcing to larger, EC-specialized companies. 
12
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Outsourcing now accounts for nearly 70% of all commercial sites ¾ 
50% of which are outsourced for access to bandwidth alone and 
50% to gain the reduced costs of a shared environment. While 
legions of ISPs offer reporting and other basic Web hosting 
services, few offer a complete suite of commerce services 
including: catalog software, shopping cart software, payment, 
shipping, tax, etc. 
Key findings of Aberdeen research into the emerging role of 
Commerce Service Providers (CSP’s) ¾ Internet Service Providers 
who are adding commerce services to their product portfolio ¾ 
include:
28.ISP’s are seeking to deliver greater “value add” to their 
customers by offering EC application outsourcing;    the 
range of services offered is expanding rapidly, starting 
from a    base of transaction processing and expanding to 
include catalog management; order management; and 
procurement management.
29.Commerce Service Providers benefit from the economy of 
scale.    They amortize the cost of a network connection, 
routers, firewalls, programmers, back-up, credit card 
processing, hardware etc. across multiple merchants.
The EC software requirements of the ISP include all the 
requirements of their customers, plus significant requirements 
related to scalability, remote administration, security and 
authentication.      Manageability is an important attribute to CSP 
providers. 
Advertising and Promotion in the Virtual Channel Grow 
Vigorously
Aberdeen research projects that Internet advertising spending will 
grow at a 78% compounded annual growth rate throughout the 
year 2000 and that Internet advertising expenditures will reach 
$4.1 billion by the Year 2000.
30.Most sites seeking in-house ad serving capabilities purchase 
products directly through ISVs.    For low volume sites, it is 
often advisable to utilize one of the many ad servers which 
can be downloaded on the Internet free of charge.    These ad 
server sites may be functionality limited, but will provide the 
13
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
basic tools to serve banner and button advertisements 
without capital investment;
31.Many sites are choosing to outsource their ad serving needs. 
Outsourcing generally takes two forms:      outsourcing the 
management and maintenance of hardware and software 
(Imgis, DoubleClick DART, AdCenter); or outsourcing the 
entire ad sales and management team to a full service 
network (DoubleCLick, AdSmart, etc).
32.Most ad server solutions can be managed and installed by 
a single ad manager.    Some vendors prefer to come on-
site to insure proper installation, but it is typically not 
necessary.    Usually accounts are up and running in a 
short amount of time.
33.There are three basic ad serving architectures.    In-house, 
which entails purchasing an ad server from an ISV and 
maintaining it on site;    outsourcing ad server 
management and maintenance; and the full service 
network.    Using a full service network means a site does 
not maintain any facet of the ad sales or serving process. 
This is an attractive option to some sites because 
maintaining an ad sales force can be a serious resource 
drain when first ramping up ad revenues.    This model 
can also be dangerous.    Ad networks directly maintain 
the relationships with advertisers and only provide sites 
with limited control over the ads that appear on their real 
estate.    Not maintaining advertiser relations means a site 
is locked into the network to keep relationships and 
contacts. 
34.The market for Internet advertising infrastructure 
software is growing at a steady pace.    Aberdeen research 
estimated this to be $40 million market in 1996 growing to 
$71.2 million market in 1997 and    $400 million (est.) in 
2000.    These numbers represent ad server, filtering, 
targeting, reporting, and other software tools which are 
part of    the advertising infrastructure.
35.The supplier community for Internet advertising 
infrastructure is quickly consolidating.    In 1997 there 
14
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
were three main segments to the marketplace; ad servers, 
profiling / targeting / reporting tools, and process 
automation tools.    Already in 1998 there are numerous 
examples of major industry players entering these 
markets (especially Microsoft with Site Server 3.0).    
Aberdeen believes that major suppliers in each segment, 
as well as computer industry powerhouses, will move 
across all segments through partnerships and 
acquisitions.    There is still opportunity for start-ups in 
the latter segments, but the door is closing quickly. 
36.Most organizations purchasing Internet advertising 
infrastructure have a dedicated ad sales manager who is 
in charge of all advertising sales, monitoring, and 
hardware/software purchases.    In small organizations, 
the duty will often fall on the CTO and CEO, since 
advertising might be their primary revenue stream. 
37.Buying criteria for advertising infrastructure products are 
mainly based on ability to integrate with existing legacy 
systems, user targeting capabilities, service levels (both 
customer service and add-on enhancement services) and 
pricing models.    Each of these criteria will see changes 
throughout 1998 as users seek increased functionality in 
more particular areas of concentration (i.e., 
personalization, targeting, billing, reporting, etc 
38.Differentiation in this space is primarily taking place 
through service offerings.    Suppliers are striving to 
provide increased functionality in all service areas to 
present a unified product suite to customers. 
39.The development of the market is primarily being 
constrained by the lack of industry standards governing the 
space.    It is difficult for vendors to improve their basic 
offerings when no standards are in place for ad 
performance measurement, user identification, or user 
tracking.
40.It is becoming increasingly important that ad servers and ad 
management tools be able to work directly with user 
15
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
profiling and targeting products.    The recent acquisition of 
Accipiter by CMG and Engage Technologies is a clear 
indicator that this market need is being realized.
41.Most users of Internet advertising infrastructure products 
continue to be web sites, but some advertisers and 
agencies have begun to utilize the technologies as well.    
For instance, Ford Motor Cars recently purchased their 
own ad server and will be serving ads directly to the sites 
they advertise on.    Aberdeen does not foresee this being a 
common trend, but where one goes some are sure to 
follow. 
42.There is a considerable difference in the pricing model of 
products in the Internet advertising infrastructure 
market.    Ad servers range in price from free for low 
volume sites, to hundreds of thousands of dollars for high 
volume sites.    Some users find these prices to be to 
inflated and have moved to outsourcing companies which 
charge on a per-thousand ads served basis, essentially 
allowing sites to pay for what they use. 
Aberdeen believes that an increasing number of sites will move to 
outsourcing their Internet advertising infrastructures.    This model 
is attractive because it frees sites from the fear of being locked into 
a proprietary infrastructure which might not be able to improve its 
functionality to meet increasing market demand.    The main force 
driving this move will be the fear of technological and financial 
lock-in to advertising infrastructure solutions.
16
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Chapter Three
Understanding The Electronic Commerce 
Revolution
A Time of Opportunity, A Time of Risk
It has been recently estimated that 45% of all adults in the US have 
some form of access to the Internet at home or at work.    An 
estimated 40,000 US businesses had Internet access at the end of 
1996; this figure is projected to grow nearly tenfold by the year 
2000.      Equally important, the sweeping advance of Internet 
technologies and their application to the requirements of 
commerce is a dominant force in the evolution of the corporation ¾ 
an essential tool to maintaining corporate competitiveness ¾ and a 
defining technology for business and consumer behavior.
This advancing virtual tidal wave of Electronic Commerce creates 
simultaneous opportunity and risk for those who venture into the 
surf.    For those who successfully catch the wave  mastering the 
technology and figuring out how to harness its power by effectively 
integrating it into core business processes  it will be a great ride.    
For those who mis-estimate its force or its curl, it will be a painful 
education through EC project wipe-outs or a beach-front view of 
competitors who successfully hang ten. 
History holds important lessons for companies embarking on 
Electronic and Electronic Commerce automation.    For all its 
success in gaining acceptance concerning standards, the basic 
connectivity afforded by the Internet still leaves a myriad of 
standards issues in ambiguity.    The Achilles’ heal of EDI has always 
been the difficulty in establishing common definitions of complex 
business transactions and effectively communicating between 
heterogeneous business systems which store highly structured data 
in very different ways.      The consumer model of Electronic 
Commerce  which assumes a browser interface for the consumer  
sidesteps the trickier issue of establishing the inter-operation 
between two different business systems to execute business-to-
business transactions.    When both sides of the interaction require 
structured communications, and their standards are different, the 
interaction is much more complex. 
17
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
The Internet is Providing Ubiquitous Connectivity 
The emergence of the Internet offers a dramatic opportunity to 
extend the reach of EC and better realize its full potential.    In the 
course of several years, it has quickly overcome a number of the 
technical barriers which have inhibited EC over the past two 
decades.    The Internet has:

spurred adoption of common communications protocols 
(TCP/IP and HTTP) and evolved a set of common software 
standards (the desktop browser and web server) which 
establish limited inter-operability between disparate 
organizations; 

developed a distributed address directory management 
capability which supports easy inter-company 
communication;

established a message routing architecture which is 
ubiquitous ¾ i.e., anywhere, anytime  and (relatively) 
reliable;

provided a redundant network able to route data along 
multiple paths, with high bandwidth  creating reliability, 
speed, and scalability;    and,

provided inter-business connectivity based on fee 
structures which are sufficiently granular with respect to 
volume and service levels to be attractive to even the 
smallest business.
The Internet provides a relatively inexpensive mechanism for 
direct connectivity between trading partners;    transport can be 
accessed with multiple levels of service ¾ from dial-in via modem 
to dedicated lines with varying capacities.      But to achieve its full 
potential, EC must coalesce around a set of common standards and 
accept the natural heterogeneity which reflects the past  and likely 
the future  history of electronic commerce.      Aberdeen research 
indicates that the technology suppliers who can provide solutions 
which inter-operate with multiple and differing systems standards 
likely to be characteristic of most extended trading networks  while 
delivering broad and architecturally integrated commerce 
functionality  are most likely to become the dominant players in 
this sector;    and their customers will become the earliest winners 
in the race to become “really wired” InterNetworked Enterprises.
Defining Electronic Commerce
Electronic Commerce (EC) is a term used to describe the 
automation of the full range of interactions across corporate 
18
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
borders between companies and people ¾ from marketing to sales, 
order placement to invoicing and payment, product distribution, 
and customer service ¾ by establishing computer-to-computer 
communication utilizing the infrastructure and standards of the 
Internet. 
Internet Commerce (EC) is the term used by Aberdeen ¾ and others 
¾ to describe the fusion of EC and Internet technologies.    From a 
business perspective, the objective of EC is quite simple:    to 
improve effectiveness, efficiency, timeliness, quality, and accuracy 
of interactions between businesses and their trading partners or 
customers. 
Traditionally, the marketing community has segmented inter-
organizational transactions as Business-to-Business (“B-to-B”) 
commerce or Business-to-Consumer (“B-to-C”) commerce.      
Aberdeen research has concluded that this segmentation is not 
particularly useful in understanding EC.    B-to-C transactions are 
really a subset of the extended supply chain; these transactions 
tend to reflect a relatively simple and narrow range of transaction 
relationships which may have significant volume of activity. (See 
Figure 1.)      B-to-B commerce relationships are more complex, 
reflecting both supply and demand business processes, and are 
frequently lower in volume. 
Figure 1:    The Extended Supply Chain 
19
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Source:    Aberdeen Group, July 1997
Although they intersect, the business processes of a buyer and 
seller do differ. (See Figure 2.)    Hence there exists a need for 
automation supporting different processes on either side of the 
transaction, e.g., procurement systems to support the buyers’ 
interests and merchant or sales systems to support the sellers’ 
interests.    These systems need to inter-operate  achieving direct 
communications between the respective trading partners’ systems 
throughout the process. 
The number and types of transactions which characterize the full 
B-to-B commerce chain are more variegated and potentially more 
complex in comparison to the transactions which characterize the 
B-to-C portion of that chain.    B-to-C transactions are generally 
limited to marketing, sales, and customer service interactions 
which are relatively structured in content and process.    Equally 
important, B-to-C interactions generally may be automated at one 
end by a browser without integration to a second business system  
because the consumer doesn’t have a “business system.”     
Eliminating the need for system-to-system inter-operation simplifies 
the problem.    The scale of B-to-C commerce transaction activity is 
frequently large by comparison to B-to-B commerce for a given 
sales site, the average revenue per transaction may be relatively 
smaller, and the payment mechanisms specialized  all of which 
have technical ramifications for the commerce automation 
systems.
EC interactions can reflect multiple level-of-automation scenarios: 
(a) an individual outside the organization interacting with the 
business system of a supplier through a browser; or (b) an 
individual working within his/her own business system and 
interacting with the business system of a trading partner; or (c) the 
business systems of two trading partners. exchanging information 
automatically with human intervention only for exception 
management.    The business benefits increase at each successive 
level  as does the complexity of the automation required.
Figure 2: The Commerce Chain is Supply Side and Demand Side 
Processes
20
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Source:    Aberdeen Group, August 1997
Segmenting the EC Market
In general, the products in the EC market can be segmented based 
on two dimensions: the technology used to provide automation; 
and    the business processes automated. 
The processes can be automated using two alternative technology 
approaches:      messaging (including both EDI and email messaging 
architectures); or real-time transaction processing.    Many of the EC 
products combine both messaging and transaction processing 
architectures is delivering a solution, often using EDI messaging to 
achieve cross-organizational, system-to-system inter-operation 
while using transaction processing for the system which controls 
the transaction. 
Aberdeen has identified six sub-segments of the EC market, each 
reflecting a different set of related business processes, which it 
uses to segment the different suppliers of EC automation:    (a) 
marketing; (b) sales; (c) procurement; (d) distribution; (e) customer 
service; and (f) supply chain planning/management. Each process 
21
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
may have “front office” and “back office” components, e.g., a 
purchasing transaction and payment processing, or multiple 
purchase orders and bill presentation. (See Figure 3).
Figure 3:    Electronic Commerce Automates Inter-Business 
Transaction Processes
Source:    Aberdeen Group, March 1998
Marketing Process Automation 
Marketing applications can be created over Internet channels to 
support several different processes:
43.Sales Collateral Distribution: Applications which deliver product 
information to the point-of-sale on request.    A virtual channel 
ensures currency of collateral and can provide multiple layers 
(e.g., “rich content”) of multi-media product information.
44.Product Marketing:    Product marketing applications generally 
exploit the two-way communications attributes of the Internet, 
establishing managed communications channels  with 
structured or unstructured content  between a company and its 
field personnel, channel partners, or customers.    The most 
sophisticated applications are workflow-enabled, and allow 
communities of interest to share and collaborate in developing    
product plans, specifications, forecasts, and market feedback.    
Collaborative marketing applications may support interaction 
22
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
using structured or unstructured message files across 
organizational boundaries:    email;    e-bulletin boards; and chat 
rooms are the earliest forms of collaboration.    Filtering and 
agent technologies are now being applied to collaboration 
applications to tailor content and schedule distribution.
45.Market Intelligence Publishing:    Applications supporting the 
controlled electronic distribution of public and private 
information via combinations of    “push” and “pull” publishing 
strategies, often incorporating tools for management and 
retrieval of information content ¾ including filtering and/or 
workflow management ¾ are frequently referred to as 
Knowledge Publishing or Knowledge Management tools.      
Baseline functionality is now being incorporated into web 
servers and browsers with recent product announcements from 
both Netscape and Microsoft.    A principle architectural 
differentiator of knowledge publishing systems is whether the 
unit of data published is a file  as contrasted to a data element 
from a database  and whether multiple file formats are 
supported.    Filtering and agent process management 
techniques are being used to tailor content and schedule its 
delivery in combination with a variety of search engines that 
vary in their level of qualitative and quantitative performance. 
46.Online Promotion:    Promotion management capabilities range 
from delivery of on-screen banner advertising  often based on 
buyer-specified search input attributes  to promotions whose 
content is tailored based on current or past customer behavior, 
attributes, knowledge of prior buying behavior, or a 
combination of all three.    The virtual channel holds the 
potential for “mass customization” ¾ the delivery of customized 
content based on unique attributes of the customer ¾ and 
virtual real-estate is marketed for advertising with the same 
mantra you see in the Sunday newspaper real estate section:    
location, location, location. 
Sales-to-Order Process Automation
Sales and Marketing EC applications create and manage virtual 
sales and marketing channels through which an organization can 
market and sell its products and services.
47.Catalogue Management:    This process may be considered part of 
either the marketing or sales processes  frequently both  and is 
integral to both sales and procurement applications.    Sales 
applications support navigation of a single supplier’s catalogue 
23
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
for its customers to transact business with the company.    
Procurement applications require support for multi-supplier 
catalogues and product comparisons.    Catalogues are generally 
differentiated by search capabilities; different levels of 
associated configuration management and pricing capabilities; 
ability to deliver content from a database;    and, widely varying 
degrees of integration with existing enterprise applications.    
The ability to customize the look and feel of catalogues is also a 
differentiating characteristic.    These user interface 
functionality characteristics may reflect or mask a more 
fundamental underlying architectural difference  whether the 
system displays static HTML pages or dynamically combines 
HTML templates with data from a database  which impacts 
scalability and performance in several dimensions: number of 
simultaneous users and size of the catalogue. Configuration 
management capabilities may be required to support complex 
product assemblies and families to enable pricing. 
48.Search and Retrieval:    Keyword searching is a baseline 
catalogue or knowledge publishing capability.    Search engines 
may be integrated with standard product classification schemes  
such as Dun and Bradstreet or Thomas Register  to assist users 
in catalogue navigation by providing a common nomenclature 
which supports “parametric” searching, a capability which has 
increased value for products with multiple technical attributes. 
The most sophisticated catalogue systems add classification data 
to supplier SKU (Stock Keeping Unit) descriptions to create 
uniform retrieval capabilities across SKU’s.    This classification 
information may also be used for decision support analysis.    
Product information may be stored as records in a database or 
as separately maintained files. 
49.Spot Market Management:    Specialized spot markets are 
emerging in both B-to-B and B-to-C to aggregate information 
from multiple sellers and support transaction processing.    The 
aggregation of content across suppliers delivers value-added 
service to the buyer; specialized decision support tools may be 
provided to support buyers’ analyses of products.    These sites 
generally can transact business, or feed other sites with 
transaction capability.
50.Transaction Processing, Back Office Processing, and Legacy 
Integration:    The back-office processing capabilities of EC sales 
automation systems can vary widely, and may include 
generation/receipt of EDI and credit card transactions, EFT 
payments, bill presentation services, and account reconciliation 
24
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
functions.    Effective back-end integration requires linkages to 
existing enterprise systems.    Different suppliers approach back-
end integration with several strategies: 
25
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
51.asynchronous file transfer, messaging, or real-time, 
transaction processing.    The systems with the strongest back-
end integration have real-time, transaction processing links to 
legacy financial, sales and distribution, and manufacturing 
systems.    They can confirm order numbers in real-time which 
match to the legacy systems environment, as well as confirm 
Availability-to-Promise and/or Availability-to-Deliver, shipping 
costs, delivery schedule, and account status information.    
Scalability differentiates various transaction management 
strategies.    Messaging approaches can simulate real-time 
linkages, depending on the underlying messaging technology 
employed.    In most instances they do not support guaranteed 
transaction commitment across both sides of a transaction. 
52.
Procurement and Purchasing Process Automation: 
53.
A number of EC applications have emerged in the past year 
which support corporate purchasing management.    These 
applications generally manage and present a multi-supplier 
catalogue for a buyer organization, and may also manage the 
workflow required to generate and issue a purchase requisition.    
The most broadly functional systems include payment and account 
reconciliation capability, as well as integrated decision support 
tools to analyze purchasing trends and practices. There are 
specialized areas of purchasing  e.g., travel request and capital 
requests  which can be automated by application extensions 
available from certain suppliers. Products also tend to sort out by 
whether they support the procurement of manufacturing resources 
or indirect materials (also known as MRO): 
54.Multi-supplier Catalogue Administration:    The strategy by which 
a multi-supplier procurement catalogue is assembled and 
maintained can vary widely  from full data replication in a 
single, central catalogue to distributed supplier catalogues with 
replication of only the index information and embedded links to 
the remote catalogue pages.    The replication strategy has 
implications on the response time experienced by End Users as 
well as the administration and software investment required by 
suppliers to maintain their primary and replicated catalogues. 
55.Product Classification and Parametric Search Capabilities:    
These multi-supplier catalogue data replication strategies are 
combined with widely differentiated product classification and 
search capabilities  e.g. keyword text, parametric classification, 
and graphical Bill of Materials  which determine the ways in 
which a buyer can find products and how fast the search 
26
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
process may be executed.    The aggregation of the product 
catalogue data from multiple suppliers creates an opportunity to 
deliver value-added differentiation for certain EC suppliers  by 
making available information from multiple suppliers for 
comparative shopping, and by creating a uniform indexing 
scheme or nomenclature through which similar products can be 
identified and compared across suppliers and SKU’s.    Certain 
products focus on classification as a value-added service to 
support product design through improved product sourcing. 
56.Complete Order Processing and Legacy Integration:    The level of 
integration  with the buyer’s own legacy purchasing systems as 
well as the supplier/trading partner’s order entry systems  also 
differentiates these products, as does the underlying transaction 
processing infrastructure; and the transaction processing 
architecture significantly impacts scalability.    However, 
scalability is not as important an attribute for these systems  
except in the instance of hosted or outsourced environments 
where multiple companies are supported  because the 
transactions generated by a single organization’s procurement 
process are likely to be far fewer than the transactions 
processed by sales automation systems.      The most advanced 
procurement systems support work flow management to control 
purchasing approval and manage real-time inventory 
commitments by the seller’s system. 
57.
Distribution and Logistics Management Process 
Automation: 
58.
Applications are emerging which support both multi-modal 
transportation logistics and create new, virtual distribution 
channels for certain types of products.
59.Logistics:    Internet applications are available which provide 
customer service functions for logistics processes, particularly 
advance shipping notices and shipment tracking.    These 
functions may be integrated into sales and procurement 
applications.
60.Soft Goods Distribution:    Internet applications are enabling the 
automated distribution of electronic products via over the 
Internet, Intranet, Extranet, or private networks.    Depending on 
the physical size of the digital product, push or pull may be used 
in conjunction with file transfer technology. 
27
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
61.
Customer Service Process Automation
62.
Internet applications can automate a range of customer 
service functions using virtual channel self-service processes: 
63.Help Desk: Knowledge bases of technical troubleshooting 
documents can be searched  generally using a text search 
engine.    These applications are widely used already by 
technology companies.    Several Customer Information System 
(CIS) suppliers have web-enabled their expert systems for 
troubleshooting and Help Desk activities.      Several suppliers 
are able to link artificial intelligence processing capabilities into 
help desk applications to enable improved troubleshooting.    A 
few suppliers  who generally specialize in Help Desk automation 
 are able to link individual customer self-service interactions 
with fee-for-service transaction capability.
64.Transaction Status:    Many EC suppliers provide limited 
“customer service” functions to support order or account status 
inquiries as part of sales-to-order and purchase-to-order EC 
applications.    Similar query functions may be provided to track 
shipment status e.g., the very visible web application linkages 
into the FedEx or UPS tracking systems).    These applications 
generally require real-time transaction access to existing 
enterprise systems (e.g., ERP).
65.
Supply Chain Management:    Applications can automate the 
collection of planning data from partners across supply chains for 
MRP, DRP and ERP planning processes:
66.Collaborative applications can collect data directly as input to 
supply chain management planning and forecasting models and 
share output under secured publishing scenarios. 
67.By extending the data collection and sharing the results, 
suppliers can wring cost out of their supply chains and improve 
their service to customers;    supply cycle times can be 
shortened;    inventory levels reduced;    and production capital 
equipment can be used more effectively. 
68.By sharing planning model output, trade partners can improve 
their own planning functions in order to reduce their cost of 
goods. 
69.
The Changing Technology Supplier Landscape
70.
The burgeoning market for electronic commerce has drawn 
the attention of every major player in the IT industry and spawned 
a profusion of independent software start-ups. 
28
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
71.
When Aberdeen began formal coverage of Electronic 
Commerce markets in January, 1996    there were fewer than 
twenty companies focused on this market.    Today, we track more 
than sixty companies, and there are literally hundreds which we 
could track ¾ and hundreds more when the ISV/CSP providers are 
included. The story in 1998 is complicated.    It is a certainty that 
not all the suppliers of technology will survive into the next 
millenium, but it is not obvious who will survive. 
72.
ISV’s focused on electronic commerce must contend with the 
software gorillas ¾ Microsoft, IBM, SAP, Oracle et.al. ¾ who are 
moving inexorably into this market with both partnering and 
development strategies at varying speeds. 
73.
How Internet Advertising Fits into Electronic Commerce
74.
Prior to 1998, Aberdeen maintained Internet advertising as a 
separate entity from our Electronic Commerce department.    
Throughout 1997 we found our market coverage to be continually 
overlapping as Internet sales, marketing and advertising worked as 
complimentary technologies in the development of the Internet 
market place as a whole.    This being the case, we have wrapped 
Internet advertising into our Electronic Commerce group for all 
future initiatives.
75.
It is important that electronic commerce and Internet 
advertising solutions work together.    Internet advertising solutions 
can learn to target end users from electronic commerce 
applications based on purchasing habits and history.    By 
understanding what a consumer has purchased in the past, a site 
can better deduce the type of products or services they might be 
interested in purchasing when connected now. 
76.
Aberdeen research has identified three core components to 
the Internet advertising infrastructure: 
77.Ad Servers; 
78.Filtering, profiling and reporting tools; 
79.Next generation automation and planning tools. 
80.
When ad servers are properly integrated with profiling, 
filtering, and targeting, applications sites can offer advertisers a more 
valuable advertising proposition.    An integrated solution will allow 
each individual ad that is served to be as finely targeted at the end 
user as possible.    As sites improve their ability to target users on a 
one-to-one basis, advertisers should see a greater click-through rate 
and improved customer conversion rate.    An integrated system will 
29
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
help advertisers realize improved ROI’s from their advertising 
initiatives and drive increased advertising activity on a site. 
81.
Improved targeting solutions are valuable to the end user as 
well.    If a user receives advertisements and promotions that are 
directly relevant to their life, their overall experience on a site will be 
enhanced.    In many cases, should ads and promotions be targeted 
well enough, they will appear as valuable content to the end user. 
82.
Integrating process automation and planning tools will allow 
sites to facilitate the ad buying process for their customers, while 
reducing internal costs.    Making site buys as easy as possible will 
result in increased return buyers and more satisfied customers.    By 
automating ad creative testing and approval, a site will lower their 
internal costs by re-allocating human resources to more productive 
tasks.    Each of the applications above are designed to increase ad 
effectiveness, maximize Cost Per Thousand (CPM) rates, minimize 
effort, and improve users overall experience of interacting with a site. 
83.
The Benefits of EC are Compelling
84.
The payoff for organizations which succeed at EC are 
extraordinarily compelling, particularly in B-to-B transactions.    
There are more than 18 billion B-to-B financial transactions a year 
and hundreds of billions of customer service interactions 
(Robertson, Stephens & Company, 1996).    Most are candidates for 
increased automation     providing dramatic opportunities to 
improve management of the manufacturing supply chain, increase 
revenue, improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of service 
delivery, reduce administrative expense, and develop more 
effective planning processes.    The most significant benefits are: 

Better service quality.    The self-service model which underlies 
many forms of EC can improve the quality of    the marketing, 
sales, support, and procurement process by delivering more 
accurate, more timely, and more complete information to the 
point-of-sale, point of decision, or point of support.    Service 
can also be delivered over a broader geographic and temporal 
base  worldwide, 7x24, or “any time, anywhere”.

Reduced service costs.    The self-service EC channel model is 
characterized by relatively low variable transaction costs  
making it increasingly cost-effective as the scale of activity 
increases.    At high volumes of activity, EC channels for sales 
and support services are likely to be low-cost channels.

Increased revenue. Extended geographic sales channels and 
improved service quality may lead directly to increased 
30
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
market share, improved brand equity, and greater revenues.    
In certain circumstances, the virtual channel can enable 
entirely new products and services.

Reduced materials expense.    Self-service procurement 
applications can support comparative shopping practices and 
reduce maverick purchasing  purchases by individual 
managers which are executed outside the corporate 
purchasing system.    By centralizing buying, MRO 
(Maintenance, Repair and Operations) procurement systems 
create greater leverage to favored trade terms and increase 
contract usage.      Specialized electronic procurement 
applications can speed the search for specialized parts and 
products, enable    cost-effective parts substitution during the 
design phase, and support effective purchasing decision 
support analysis. 

Reduced time to complete a business transaction.    By 
communicating electronically, the time required to place and 
confirm an order can be compressed by hours or, in some 
cases, days or weeks. This, in turn, shortens the lead time for 
product delivery.    As a result, it may be possible to reduce 
parts or finished goods inventories or receive critical product 
more rapidly to gain competitive advantage  or the greater 
benefits derived from earlier product delivery.

Reduced administrative costs. The cost of processing purchase 
requisitions, purchase orders, and payments can be 
dramatically reduced, as can invoice and bill presentation 
costs.    The accuracy of business transactions is improved, 
increasing customer satisfaction, reducing transaction 
auditing and reprocessing administrative expenses, and 
reducing the costs of expedited manufacturing and/or 
shipping to correct erroneous or late orders.

Reduced logistics operating costs.    More accurate and timely 
shipping information support use of cross-docking warehouse 
strategies ¾ where inventory is cross-loaded on the shipping 
dock, rather than stored in a warehouse (and later 
forwarded).    Certain types of products  which can be 
represented digitally  can be shipped at dramatically lower 
cost with faster delivery. 

Improved Return-on-Capital.    By shortening the “product 
turn” cycle    and the payment cycle, organizations can reduce 
the amount of material requirements and the time funds must 
be committed to pay for the production of inventory, 
31
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
materially lowering capital requirements.    Faster inter-
company communications support Just in Time (JIT) or Build-
to-Order manufacturing strategies and Cross-Docking logistics 
strategies; and,

Increased ROI and ROE through better planning.    More timely 
planning information allows more efficient acquisition and 
scheduling of capital equipment, reducing unit costs and 
increasing the Return on Investment for basic industries and 
insuring a better match between manufacturing capacity, 
production output, and market demand.    By improving the 
timeliness and quality of MRP and ERP input, capital facilities 
acquisition and utilization can be better optimized for 
profitability;    improved forecasting can better assure 
adequate production capacity and improve product 
availability; and reduce raw material and excess finished 
goods inventory. 
85.
32
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
86.
87.
Chapter 
Four
88. Issues and Challenges:
Catch the Wave; Ride the Wave
89.
EC:    The Killer App for the Internet and Objects
90.
Aberdeen research indicates that Electronic Commerce is the 
“killer application” for the Internet and Object-oriented 
development methodologies.    The emerging virtual channels are 
simultaneously enabled and embodying these technologies.      For 
EC, in the words of Marshall MacCluhan, “The medium is the 
message.” Bandwidth availability on the Internet backbone, and 
high speed access to that backbone, remain critical points of 
interest in driving the acceptance of the technology and the 
diffusion of EC.
91.
The rapid emergence of EC markets has surfaced inevitable 
conflicts between open standards, performance objectives, 
functionality and ease of application customization and 
administration.    Yet the very objective of Electronic Commerce ¾ 
to integrate heterogeneous business systems of disparate business 
partners ¾ demands a convergence on standards (neé “open”) to 
achieve full potential. 
92.
Balancing the Channels in The InterNetworked 
Enterprise
93.
By now everyone has heard of Amazon.com, a “Virtual 
Company” which uses the Internet as it only channel for sales.    But 
even this company built around the virtual channel is using 
multiple channels for its marketing programs.    The “Virtual 
Company” is a seductive concept which is, in Aberdeen’s opinion, 
applicable to relatively few companies.    Most organizations have a 
history  and existing IT systems and delivery channels.    Most 
companies will require multiple channels to build a solid business; 
therefore, for most companies, EC must complement and balance 
other existing channels.
33
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
94.
InterNetworked Enterprises are generally enabling new 
products and services or changing the attributes of products and 
services already offered by the corporation.    Companies need to 
understand how customer behavior will change in response to 
these new channel attributes, as well as the cost and revenue 
impacts of this change.    Aberdeen research has concluded that EC 
applications are generally characterized by relatively low variable 
costs as the commerce activity scales, provided that the underlying 
product architecture is itself scaleable.    However, the economics of 
the InterNetworked Enterprise reflect a complex economic 
equilibrium. (See Figure 4.) 
95.
Figure 4:    The InterNetworked Enterprise:    The Channel 
Impacts Cut Both Ways
96.
 
97.
Electronic Commerce Evolution:    Of Darwin and Deja 
Vu…
98.
The evolution and revolution of EC should be understood as 
a technology transition which has important parallels in the shift 
from mainframe to Client-Server architectures  which also 
supported significantly modified    internal business processes  
which began nearly a decade ago. 
99.
There exists a real danger that today’s EC point solutions will 
become islands of application automation which are not fully 
34
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
integrated into the fabric of the business.    In short, there is a high 
risk that today’s EC solutions become tomorrow’s legacy systems ¾ 
stovepipes which are difficult to integrate and expensive to 
maintain.
100.
This Client-Server transition was Darwinian in character; it 
rewarded early adopters able to successfully execute a change 
strategy by improving their competitiveness in the market.    
However, much of the activity  successful and unsuccessful  which 
Aberdeen observes in the EC market today reflects a rather 
opportunistic process rather than a managed strategy.    In many 
cases, the applications described above have been implemented as 
individual “point solutions.”    This approach yields short term 
improvements, but serves to constrain longer-term benefits.    
Organizations need to control overriding architecture and open 
standards issues to maintain any hope of integrating point 
solutions as they move forward. Genuinely valuable Internet 
Commerce applications often involve shared access to information 
by a variety of internal employees and external customers and 
trade partners, and often require integration of multiple EC and 
legacy applications to achieve maximum benefit.
101.
Systems integration is a strong component of any such effort. 
Most users are still turning directly to suppliers, rather than 
systems integrators and consulting firms, for major corporate 
projects ¾ but Aberdeen expects that to begin changing this year 
because systems integrators and consulting firms are ramping up 
significant practices on a variety of new products in extended 
enterprise products ¾ a subject covered by Aberdeen’s EC 
professional services practice.    Smaller Web efforts should turn to 
their ISP or CSP in order to add commerce to their existing web 
sites. 
102.
Successful Internet companies have learned how to use the 
Web and email to offer uniquely valuable buying services rather 
than simply extending their existing business to the Internet to 
compete with well-established communications habits.    In offering 
such value, the nature of the merchant/customer relationship also 
changes, sometimes dramatically.    For example, online automobile 
sales are stress-free.    The buyer never sits in the car with a 
salesman nudging them toward their wallet.    The dealer’s cost 
basis is exposed to the customer ¾ and even dealer “holdback” and 
“marketing” fees are open to view.    Prospects can complete their 
research faster and even get a loan online without having a hungry 
35
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
sales person lingering over their shoulder during an embarrassing 
credit check.
103. The Big Picture Questions for EC Technology Buyers
104.
Organizations embarking today on the ocean of Electronic 
Commerce need to understand that the only thing predictable 
about the weather is that it is probably going to change before they 
arrive at their destination.    The technology is changing; key 
standards are not yet mature or widely accepted.    The new 
business process models underlying these applications are still 
being tested and refined to identify “best practices” and application 
functionality is undergoing parallel evolution.    Among the more 
critical short term questions are:
105.
Should I pursue an EDI strategy, or should I only be 
developing EC applications? If I select EDI, should I utilize an 
Internet transport strategy or a VAN?
106.
If I pursue EC applications    should I build from the 
ground up, purchase middleware tool sets, or license 
completed applications ? 
107.
How can I evaluate EDI and EC automation suppliers 
and products?    Should I be developing or acquiring “point 
solutions” or “integrated applications?”
108.
To EC or EDI: That is the Question
109.
Organizations which have not yet implemented any form of 
electronic commerce often ask: which investment should be made 
first, EDI messaging or transaction-oriented EC?    The lure of EC is 
great; its potential benefits are greater.    But EDI is a more proven 
technology and certain key trading partners may have already 
designated it as their preferred automation strategy; it may yield 
more predictable results.
110.
EDI automates existing processes using messaging 
technology; its benefits are derived from underlying cost and time-
efficiency.    Aberdeen believes that EDI will continue to be an 
important form of electronic commerce for a number of years 
between trusted trading partners where the volume of transactions 
is very high and the transaction set is highly structured. (See Figure 
5.)      Aberdeen research suggests that the cost of EDI will continue 
to decline on a relative basis over the next several years as the 
Internet transforms the network itself from a value-added product 
into a commodity and improved EDI server with file mapping 
capabilities  using object technologies     to reduce the front-end 
36
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
investment required to integrate EDI with existing corporate 
systems and increase the flexibility of the messaging content 
supported by the process.
111.
Figure 5:    The Evolving Roles of EDI and EC
112.
113.
Source:    Aberdeen Group, October 1997
114.
Aberdeen believes that both IC and Internet-enabled EDI 
strategies will continue to be appropriate and that hybrid solutions 
will co-exist  frequently within the same organization  through the 
year 2000 and beyond.      The “secure messaging” technology which 
underlies EDI is useful for a wide variety of structured 
transactions.    The new forms of EC and the vision of the 
InterNetworked Enterprise offer a powerful promise:    reduced 
costs; improved product or service quality; shortened business 
process cycles; and increased revenues through improved MRP, 
ERP, purchasing, customer service, sales, marketing, and back-
office operations.    The messaging architecture of EDI is, by its very 
nature, highly structured and unable to support interactions which 
are dynamically infused with rich content.    Many organizations 
will need to support both EDI and real-time EC applications to 
differentiate themselves and maintain cost-competitiveness.    The 
standards and strategies of one’s trading partners are the critical 
37
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
elements of this decision.    If important trading partners demand 
EDI, it is important to support it.
115.
In the short run the ability to simultaneously exploit both 
approaches may differentiate the technologically adept from the 
less agile organizations.    In the long run, the greater process 
flexibility supported by real time processing and EC offers greater 
benefits to the business than messaging technologies.    The drive to 
realize these extended benefits will, in Aberdeen’s opinion, make 
transactional Internet Commerce ¾ rather than EDI ¾    the 
dominant electronic commerce technology over the next decade.
116.
Build, Buy, or Outsource?
117.
Aberdeen believes that there is little reason to consider 
custom development for EDI enablement. The messaging 
technology to manage EDI is mature and proven.    Buying and 
outsourcing are both viable options.    The decision should be based 
on the combination of economics and skill base; systems 
integration services are integral to either strategy.
118.
The “build vs. buy” question is trickier when asked about EC 
because these applications are less mature, and the underlying 
technology less proven.    To answer this question one should look 
at the history of enterprise business applications  to parallel 
transitions: (a) from batch computing to online computing; and (b) 
from mainframe to Client-Server computing.      Placed in this 
context, it is easy to see that the transition from Client-Server to EC 
is notable for the speed of its progression.      And if the historical 
analogy has validity, only those organizations seeking strategic 
advantage should be building Web applications from the ground up 
–- and only when supplier solutions are inadequate.    The 
marketplace has already produced a number of Web-application 
middleware tool vendors, most of whom are evolving into EC 
applications suppliers.    And in the last year, literally hundreds of 
EC application suppliers have announced new companies and new 
products. 
119.
Aberdeen research indicates that the application market is 
maturing rapidly. The full breadth of the EC opportunity is not fully 
supported by any single supplier.    To meet that challenge, a 
number of technologies must be integrated in an Internet-enabled 
context:    messaging; transaction processing; workflow automation; 
knowledge base classification, management and retrieval; and 
intelligent agents.    There are many “point solutions” available for 
EC  automating a single or several business processes such as sales 
or help desk.    In the past six months, Aberdeen has observed the 
38
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
first “integrated EC” suppliers  who aspire to “do it all” with    
broader product functionality, better defined linkages to existing 
ERP systems, and support for a wider range of inter-operability 
standards.    Aberdeen recommends that organizations select any 
point solutions with a keen eye to their underlying architecture ¾ 
it’s degree of “openness”, scalability, maintainability,    and 
extensibility with respect to integration issues. 
120.
Aberdeen research suggests that outsourcing of EC 
applications to Commerce Service Providers (CSP’s) will be an 
attractive alternative for many companies.      The requisite skill sets 
required to maintain and manage EC technologies remain scarce.    
The front end cost of robust software functionality is relatively 
steep, and support requirements are non-trivial.    As a result, the 
fixed costs of entry are relatively steep. 
121.
Some  but not all  EC products can effectively support 
multiple companies from a single environment, affording the 
opportunity for CSP’s to achieve economies of scale.    As CSP’s 
evaluate software, they need to identify suppliers whose products 
can deliver a look and feel tailored for the business process and 
reflecting the identity of each customer of the CSP  as well as 
tailoring the content delivered to the end customers of the systems. 
The software economics of EC suggest that CSP’s will be very 
important to the middle and lower ends of the business enterprise 
spectrum.    The architecture of the InterNetworked Enterprise 
lends itself to cross-organizational boundary systems integration, 
minimizing certain problems traditionally associated with 
outsourcing.
122.
Outsourcing of ad serving functions is particularly attractive 
for organizations whose advertising requirements are relatively 
simple ¾ e.g., banners and buttons.    This decision can often be 
made independent of where the actual EC application itself is 
hosted. 
123.
What are the Important Attributes to Evaluate in 
Comparing 
EC Applications?
124.
Aberdeen believes that the technology selection process 
should appropriately balance concerns about the attributes which 
will have enduring importance.        Functionality is important, but 
we have already learned, or perhaps re-learned, that system design 
and performance are critical issues in user acceptance in Web 
applications  just as they were for mainframe and Client-Server 
39
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
applications.    Today’s functionality can evolve and grow if the 
infrastructure provides:      performance and scalability; a flexible, 
productive development environment, maintainability and an 
extensible integration capability.    Aberdeen research has 
identified seven architectural attributes which are important in 
assessing EC product architectures: 

Process View and Process Flexibility:    Does the system reflect 
a process view of business or a functional “stovepipe” view?    
What processes are being automated?    Do they represent 
“best practices” and can your organization benefit from the 
re-engineered process?    Does the system have a workflow 
management capability and can underlying processes be 
tailored easily?    Does the system provide the ability to tailor 
the application look and feel to organization-specific and 
user-specific requirements?    Does the system provide 
different interfaces for different customers?    Does it adapt to 
the frequent users to streamline their interactions?    Are 
business rules isolated from base system processing 
functions?

Openness and External Systems Integration:    What 
assumptions are made about the degree of conformity and 
adoption of compatible software or at trading partner sites? 
Does it require homogeneous software across trading 
networks, or can it communicate with other EC systems based 
on standards?    Does the vendor support the major open inter-
operability standards emerging for EC?    Does the system 
support both EDI and messaging technology inter-operating 
directly with EC transaction applications?    How consistent is 
the application with your organization’s standards for: object 
brokerage; RDBMS; and operating systems? 

System Performance and Scalability:    Does the system 
architecture provide transaction processing performance, and 
is the system scaleable  with high performance at increasing 
user transaction volumes in the ranges anticipated over time? 
Does the system scale with respect to increasing numbers of 
simultaneous users and transactions?    Does it scale with 
respect to the size of    the product catalogue or product 
database?    Can the system scale to manage multiple 
companies in a single hosted environment?    The underlying 
middleware infrastructure utilized by each supplier serves as 
a primary determinant of the scalability of the application(s). 
Products differ in their suitability for multi-company hosted 
or CSP environments. 
40
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 

Ease of Administration: For sales and procurement systems, 
how does it manage the creation and update of content?    
How does it manage the assembly of a catalogue  or 
catalogues spanning multiple suppliers  and does this strategy 
support performance for end-users and efficient 
administration for suppliers?    How mature are the 
application administration tools?    Can applications be 
maintained (e.g. Web catalogue updates) while the system is 
online?    Is there version and change control capability?

Internal Systems Integration:    Does the system provide an 
integrated architecture which efficiently integrates EC 
application functionality, leverages systems resources, and 
leverages support resources across multiple EC applications? 
Does the system provide an architecture which can effectively 
integrate with existing legacy enterprise business applications 
on a real-time basis? 

Extensibility:    Does the system support creation of additional 
application functionality  including a tool set for 
implementing customized or tailored functionality?    Note 
that all EC automation suppliers have developed some form of 
middleware to support their applications.    Relatively few of 
these suppliers provide these tool sets as stand-alone 
products, although many will bundle utility tools as part of 
their product to support customization.    Is the system built 
on an object development standard ¾ using CORBA or DCOM 
¾ to promote extensibility?

Functionality:    What business processes and business 
functions are supported?    How well do they map to your 
organization’s requirements? 
125. EC Technology Supplier Success Factors
126.
1998 will be a year of execution.    Much of the hype is settling 
and the value of the extended enterprise, the Internet sales and 
marketing channel, and the Internet/Intranet procurement channel 
will become better understood as this year progresses.    These 
applications support new business process models, and they will 
need to be refined as experience is gained.    Each product category 
will need to make significant changes in order to keep their 
products in alignment with market requirements.      This will put a 
strain on the development budgets of every EC technology supplier 
¾ which favors suppliers with deep pockets.    The need to evolve 
41
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
quickly has a number of implications for the suppliers of EC 
technologies:

EC ISV’s suppliers must adopt and implement a “platform 
strategy” ¾ aligning themselves with an underlying web 
server and transaction management middleware 
architecture ¾ in order to allow themselves to focus on 
application-level functionality and attain desired 
characteristics of scalability and extensibility ¾ and 
leverage the development investment of the middleware 
suppliers.

The major EC and I/P middleware suppliers ¾ Microsoft, 
Netscape, BroadVision and Oracle ¾ must continue to 
evolve and enhance their ISV programs.    Issues related to 
integration of Client/Server and mainframe legacy 
applications to the EC and EC applications will come to the 
forefront. 

All EC suppliers must recognize the critical role of 
integration services with a broad set of initiatives 
including defined API’s and interfaces to ERP systems and 
structured methodologies for executing integration 
projects.

The rapid pace of market change will place a premium on 
distribution channels and integration resources.    
Companies will need to execute Indirect Channel 
distribution strategies to tap into the rapid growth in 
demand and deliver the post-sale implementation 
requirements.    Significant capital will be needed to 
establish direct sales channels. 

The need for alliances between marketing and promotion 
automation suppliers and other EC application ISV’s will 
become self-evident ¾ and numerous partnerships will be 
announced.    As the market moves from “home grown” to 
ISV applications, the pace of these alliances will be 
accelerated.

Integration remains a potential Achilles’ heal for every 
ISV.    Although integration is frequently more a problem 
of perspiration than inspiration, it’s importance is often 
overlooked and downplayed ¾ but it cannot be ignored.
127.
Aberdeen believes that 1998 is the year that EC ISV’s will 
reach for the brass ring.    Those companies who successfully 
execute both product and distribution plans will emerge from the 
42
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
pack and ride the wave towards the millenium with that ring in 
their grasp.    Others will misjudge the force of this wave, or lack 
the skill to ride it, with a resulting “wipe out.”
43
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
128.
129. Chapter Five
130.The Suppliers of EC Applications and 
Middleware
131.
Few areas of research covered by Aberdeen have exhibited 
the explosive growth ¾ of business activity and vendor activity ¾ 
which is present in the Electronic Commerce sector.    When 
Aberdeen began covering Electronic Commerce eighteen months 
ago we were able to identify approximately twenty companies 
focused on the business problem of enabling electronic commerce. 
Since then, we have now begun coverage of more than sixty 
organizations ¾ and recognize that there are many more who 
remain “below our radar screen.”
132.
The following companies are currently followed by Aberdeen 
and included in current or pending Aberdeen Electronic Commerce 
Research Reports.    The following analysis reflect our Q2-1998 
market positioning synopsis for each company.
44
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
133. ADSmart Corporation
134.
100 Brickstone Square
First Floor
Andover, MA    01810
(978) 684-3780
www.adsmart.net
135.
ADSmart is a full service network ad serving solution.    It’s 
business model focuses on providing all aspects of ad sales, serving, 
targeting, and reporting to web sites from all categories.    ADSmart 
allows sites to advertise without making the capital investment in 
hardware, software and human resources necessary to start the 
process.    The company differentiates itself from other full service 
ad networks and in-house ad servers based on its True Targeting 
System.    This user targeting system goes beyond traditional 
demographic targeting to incorporate demographic, psychographic, 
and behavior based targeting to better define a user and their 
interests.    ADSmart’s True Targeting System relies on information 
gleaned from all advertising sites in the ADSmart network.    Each 
individual ad space is tagged to show the type of content which 
surrounds it and the type of user which is attracted to that content. 
Using these tags and 350 characteristic based criteria, ADSmart 
delivers targeted advertisements to users across the entire 
network.
136.
ADSmart, and ad networks in general, are well positioned to 
serve the needs of growing content providers.    Most top 100 sites 
will maintain their own ad sales department, but sites outside of 
the top 100 can benefit from use of ad networks through decreased 
overhead, increased market visibility, and increased ad sales. 
137.
138. Accipiter, Inc.
139.
4000 Wake Forest Rd., Suite 200
Raleigh, NC    27609
(919) 872-7755
www.accipiter.com
140.
Accipiter’s in-house ad server, AdManger, is designed to meet 
the advertising needs of companies from on-line start-ups to new 
media leader.    By making the product functional from plug-in, yet 
fully customizable and robust, Accipiter has enjoyed tremendous 
success in the ad server marketplace.
45
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
141.
Accipiter’s core areas of focus are user targeting, campaign 
management, reporting, inventory management, scalability, billing, 
and ease of use.    The robustness of the product is coupled with an 
open API which allows end users to customize at all levels of 
functionality.    Accipiter was the first ad server provider to 
recognize the importance of including powerful front-office 
automation capabilities with their ad server solution.    Accipiter 
also chose customer support as a core area of differentiation. 
AdManager users to can chose service levels ranging from monthly 
quality assurance phone calls to on-site visits from Accipiter 
representatives. 
142.
Accipiter’s solution is designed to act as an in-house solution, 
a network solution, or is available through an outsourcing 
program.
143.
144. AdKnowledge, Inc. (Formerly ClickOver and 
Focalink)
145.
2191 E. Bayshore Rd.
Palo Alto, CA    94303
(650) 842-0660
www.adknowledge.com
146.
AdKnowledge resulted from the merger of ClickOver, a 
supplier of Java-based Internet ad management software, and 
Focalink, an industry leader in media planning, ad placement, 
analysis and reporting tools.    The merger, which occurred late in 
1997, is evidence of a growing trend in Internet advertising to 
package ad serving capabilities with strong analysis and reporting 
tools.    As a unified entity, the company can offer both advertisers 
and publishers the market knowledge they need to make informed 
marketing decisions, facilitate the buying and ad serving process, 
and ultimately analyze decisions and campaigns based on user and 
market feedback.
147.
AdKnowledge’s product, ClickWise 2, offers most of the 
functionality of other leading AdServers, but finds its 
differentiation point in what it calls the Ad Optimizer.    The Ad 
Optimizer runs in real time to determine what ad is best suited to a 
particular viewer or page every time an ad is requested. The Ad 
Optimizer monitors contractual agreements with advertisers, 
accesses available user data, recognizes page constraints, 
46
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
frequency, and potential traffic to ensure that ad campaigns are 
run efficiently and completely. 
148. Ariba Technologies, Inc.
149.
1670 Plymouth Street, Suite 103
Mountain View, CA 94043
650-237-3800 
www.ariba.com
150.
Ariba Technologies develops and markets enterprise 
electronic commerce applications focused on Operating Resource 
Management  the company’s term for purchasing and procurement 
processes which support the operations of the enterprise, exclusive 
of manufacturing production material.    The company’s product 
line, known as the Ariba Operating Resource Management System 
(“ORMS”), provides comprehensive application support for the 
entire acquisition life cycle for a wide range of operating materials, 
supplies, and services.    It presents a single interface for a variety 
of workflow-based Extranet application requirements which have 
the entire enterprise as the intended user population. The product 
is    differentiated by its support for a broad range of complex work 
flow processes; its real-time integration with existing enterprise 
systems, and the quality of its human factors engineering. 
151.
 
152. Art Technology Group
153.
101 Huntington Avenue
Boston, Massachusetts 02199
(617) 859-1212
www.atg.com
154.
Art Technology Group is recognized as an industry-leading 
supplier of Java-based EC software and professional services.    Art 
Technology Group is among the few EC suppliers that is focused 
specifically on managing end-user relationships via the Web. ATG is 
beginning to win industry acceptance among ISVs who are using 
the underlying technologies to craft complete Internet-based, 
enterprise-class business solutions.
155.
Fortune-class companies are interested in relationship 
management software because it allows them to simultaneously 
consolidate web interfaces and operations, support mass-
customization of content to groups of users, or customize content to 
47
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
a Market-of-One.    Such applications provide greater customer 
service, better-targeted promotions, advice, and relevant 
information to customers, employees, and trading partners.
156.
ATG's commerce products, Retail and Ad Stations, are 
modular and easy to customize.    They allow companies to build 
customizable Web sites for managing online relationships without 
having to develop a large monolithic Web environment.
157.
Aberdeen finds that users are generally impressed with ATG's 
technology and products and they are beginning to realize the 
advantages of server-side Java applications.    Server-side Java 
programming makes the Dynamo environment surprisingly 
reliable, scalable, and easy to manage because it avoids many 
memory trappings and convoluted coding required with other 
languages.      Despite the relatively lackluster marketing efforts to 
date, ATG is winning new customers, it is increasing its mind share 
and recruiting ISV partners primarily as the result of solid products 
and executive word-of-mouth. 
158.
159. Aspect Development, Inc.
160.
1300 Charleston Road 
Mountain View, CA 94034
(650) 428-2700
www.aspectdv.com
161.
Aspect Development is a leading supplier of parametric 
search and catalogue management software designed to support 
procurement and engineering design processes.    Aspect’s 
component and supplier management software provides a unique 
and powerful foundation for constructing, maintaining and 
efficiently searching multi-supplier product catalogues and 
integrating this technology into the design engineering process  by 
promoting design re-use, encouraging selection of preferred parts 
and suppliers in new designs, and delivering Bill-of-Material 
optimization analysis throughout the design life cycle.      In the last 
year the company added a set of purchasing    analysis applications 
intended to support contract negotiation and supplier 
rationalization processes. 
162.
Aspect publishes the largest family of content databases for 
standard electrical and mechanical components.    They currently 
integrate data for more than two million parts provided by over 
700 suppliers.
48
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
163.
The Aspect CSM system is marketed on an VAR basis by SAP, 
and has been directly integrated with:    a number of ERP supplier 
products, including    SAP., Baan and Oracle;    Parts Data 
Management Products, including Sherpa and Metaphase;    and 
design engineering products including Parametric, Mentor, 
ViewLogic, Cadence, Computervision. 
164.
165. Bellcore ¾ Soliant Internet Systems
166.
444 Hoes Lane
Piscataway,    NJ    08854-4182
(888) 876-5426
www.soliant.com
167.
Bellcore has wrapped all of their Internet solutions up into a 
common environment they call Soliant Internet Systems.    Included 
in this product grouping is the Soliant Advertising System, designed 
to provide web publishers with all of the tools to serve, manage, 
and maintain advertisements on their site.    By incorporating the 
product into the larger network solution, Bellcore offers strong 
targeting capabilities, a scalable architecture, and a solid base of 
experience in providing network software to the industry.    
Utilizing the Soliant RapidApps solution, publishers can obtain 
automatic visitor session tracking and dynamic page generation.    
Bellcore’s pricing model is friendly to sites of all sizes, offering the 
product for purchase, lease, or on a revenue sharing basis.    Soliant 
Advertising System is designed to work as either a single site, or 
multi-site, ad management solution. 
168.
169. BroadVision, Inc.
170.
333 Distel Circle
Los Altos, CA 94022
(408) 943-3600 
www.broadvision.com/
171.
BroadVision is a market leader in developing and marketing 
enterprise-class, multi-channel Internet and Intranet application 
middleware as well as    integrated applications for the financial 
49
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
sector based on this middleware foundation.    The middleware tool 
set includes a wide range of tools which support both mass 
customization of applications to target segments and individual 
customization for Segment-of-One marketing, as well as a set of 
centralized services and capabilities for efficiently and scalably 
managing real-time and asynchronous links to existing enterprise 
applications.    BroadVision is among a very few companies that has 
demonstrated an ability to manage simultaneous application 
requirements for high scalability and dynamic personalization. 
172.
BroadVision is one of the few EC suppliers which is publicly 
traded (NASDAQ: BVSN).      It’s annual revenue run rate in Q1’98 of 
more than $40m makes it one of the largest suppliers of EC 
software. 
173.
174. BurstMedia
175.
10 New England Executive Park
Burlington, MA    01803
(781) 229-6052
www.burstmedia.com
176.
BurstMedia designed its full service ad network to be as easy 
to install, use, and profit from as possible.    BurstMedia’s product, 
the BURST! Network, has tremendous reach due to its ease of 
installation and management.    With free downloadable software, 
any site on the web can offer advertising sold, managed, and 
maintained by BurstMedia.    BurstMedia seeks to maximize users 
earnings, by minimizing their efforts, and providing service and 
information to help its members grow.    BURST! Treats its members 
more as partners than as clients.    With programs designed to drive 
traffic, deliver statistics, and provide users with a space to 
collaborate, BURST! Offers sites an advertising environment 
without headache or expense.
177.
Mixed among BURST!’s numerous small sites are a few large 
publishers.    BurstMedia needs to better advertise to the market the 
value of the BURST! Network in order to bring in more big ticket 
sites to provide real revenues.
50
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
178.
179. Commerce One, Inc.
180.
1600 Riviera Avenue
Walnut Creek, CA 94596
(925) 941 6000
www.commerce-one.com
181.
Commerce One is among a group of relatively young 
companies who have brought I/P procurement products which 
leverage and support fundamentally new business process models 
and/or provide improved and extended automation for existing 
processes. 
182.
C1 is differentiated in the market by a unique combination of 
factors:    its strong transaction processing and inter-operation 
infrastructure; the robustness of its multi-supplier catalog 
management functionality; the utilization of an Extranet to manage 
inter-company transactions; complex product configuration and 
pricing management capabilities; and the strength of its channel 
partnerships for legacy and ERP product integration, product 
distribution, and systems integration.    It has a strong ISV 
relationship with Microsoft and an equity investment from SAP AG 
¾ which also co-markets the C1 products ¾ both of whom should 
provide significant indirect channel leverage in 1998 and 1999. 
183.
184. Connect, Inc.
185.
515 Ellis Street
Mountain View, CA 94043-2242
(650) 254-4000
www.connectinc.com
186.
Connect, Inc. develops and markets Internet-based New EC 
applications for    Order Management and Purchasing Management. 
The company was an early leader in delivering products which 
were database-driven and supported dynamic catalogue content.    
Its products reflect a leading-edge architecture  Java and Netscape 
Enterprise Server, an object development infrastructure, and a 
transaction management-layer implemented in Unix/Oracle server 
environments.
51
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
187.
Connect has positioned these products as a complete sales-to-
order and procurement-to-order business-to-business EC solutions 
which can be implemented in a relatively short time period, as well 
as offering versions of these products tailored to Commerce Service 
Provider organizations. 
188.
189. CyberCash, Inc.
190.
2100 Reston Parkway
Reston, VA 20191
(703) 620-4200
www.cybercash.com
191.
CyberCash allows merchants to add a small piece of code (a 
plug-in) to any of the major industry commerce application 
platforms.    The plug-in or "Cash Register," allows merchants to 
accept several forms of Internet payment and automatically clears 
the funds with related banks and credit card processors. 
192.
Aberdeen finds that some of the largest credit card-centric 
Web sites interact directly with card processors.    However, Web 
publishers and large corporations are finding that they need 
greater payment flexibility.    For example, publishers want to be 
able to offer tiered pricing models that support "pay-per-view," and 
large corporate sites want to offer online bill payment.    By 
partnering with CyberCash, merchants and publishers can exploit a 
suite of payment options, including credit card transactions, 
micropayments, and money (check or bill payment).
193.
194. DigiCash, Inc.
195.
100 South Ellsworth Avenue, 9th floor
San Mateo, California 94401
(415) 321 0300
www.digicash.com
196.
Digicash is well established as an international Internet 
payment option.    Unlike other Internet payment options, Digicash's 
ecash digital currency does not involve major credit card 
processors.    Rather, banks exchange conventional currency for 
52
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Internet ecash currency.    Unfortunately, the payment system 
requires that users have an account with an issuing bank. 
197.
198. DoubleClick, Inc.
199.
41 Madison Ave., 32nd Floor
New York, NY    10010
(212) 683-0001
www.doubleclick.net
200.
DoublClick is currently the most recognized name in the 
Internet advertising space.    After a wildly successful IPO, this full-
service ad network has continued to grow its base of popular sites. 
The DoubleClick Network boasts ad sales and serving for some of 
the most trafficked sites on the web and maintains impressive 
depth well beyond the top 100 sites.    DoubleClick’s ad sales model 
is mainly CPM based, but it has begun to venture into price 
performance advertising and other ad sales models which have not 
yet been explored by its competitors.    DoubleClick has also 
developed its DART serving and targeting technology to function as 
a licensed product to sites which maintain their own ad sales 
forces.    This sort of software/hardware outsourcing    is becoming 
increasingly popular, and DoubleClick continues to be a leading 
market pioneer. DoubleClick has currently cookied well over 25 
million Internet users in order to allow it to offer accurate user 
targeting and profiling.    Using the DoubleClick DART targeting 
technology, advertisers have the option of targeting prospects on 
more precise profiling criteria then most systems today. 
201.
DoubleClick has a strong product and an even stronger 
marketing department.    DoubleClick has successfully branded 
itself as the Internet advertising leader in the popular press and 
advertising circles.    Aberdeen recognizes DoubleClick’s rampant 
success, but remains wary of what the future will hold should 
AltaVista, the search service which represents nearly 45% of 
DoubleClicks business, be sold or revamped as a result of the 
proposed purchase of Digital Equipment Corporation by Compaq.
53
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
202.
203. EC Verify, Inc.
204.
473 Roland Way
Oakland, CA 94621
(510) 553-7500
www.ecverify.com
205.
The EC Verify payment system is the dark horse of Internet 
payments.    It is the least talked about but most used system.    It is a 
remarkably simple and effective dial-up and leased line point-of-
sale credit card and debit card processing software package.    EC 
Verify may be used to process transactions at both the physical 
point-of-sale and at the Web point-of-sale.    EC Verify is an excellent 
payment solution for any electronic commerce venture that wants 
a cost-effectively process credit card transactions.
206.
EC Verify is financially stable and Aberdeen expects the 
company to continue expanding its payment services in 1998 
starting with a TCP/IP version of its software.    The payment 
services will include more complex payment such as 
microtransactions if Microsoft and Netscape add greater client-side 
payment support. 
207.
208. ELEKOM Corporation
209.
500 108th Avenue Northeast,    Suite 1400
Bellevue, WA 98004
425 990 3060
www.elekom.com
210.
ELEKOM is a supplier of procurement process automation 
applications enabled through the Internet and Extranets. ELEKOM 
has targeted the purchasing organization and has concentrated its 
energy on enabling materials and operating resource procurement 
across the organization. 
211.
ELEKOM Procurement is the second generation of Internet-
enabled procurement products to be delivered to the market by the 
company  an attribute which is reflected in the narrow focus of the 
company on procurement automation as well as specific 
architectural design decisions.    It is one of two companies 
developing New EC applications with this narrow product focus.    
(Ariba is the other.) 
54
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
212.
ELEKOM Procurement is differentiated by the architecture it 
employs to build and maintain its multi-supplier product catalogue  
a strategy which distributes the catalogue management functions 
between local servers at the purchaser and the servers of the 
supplier to effectively achieve the sometimes conflicting objectives 
of processing performance for the end-user and catalogue control by 
the suppliers.    Its pricing policies also serve to differentiate it from 
its most direct competitors  with significantly lower entry-price 
points. 
213.
214. First Virtual Holdings Incorporated
215.
11975 El Camino Real, Suite 200
San Diego, CA 92130
(619) 793-2700
www.fv.com
216.
The First Virtual Internet payment system is elegantly 
simple.    It essentially triangulates email-like messages to securely 
authenticate consumer transactions.    Once authenticated, First 
Virtual processes a credit card transaction on behalf of an Internet 
consumer with a major card processor.    Unfortunately, the 
system's simplicity is not sufficient to serve as a major Internet 
payment technology. 
217.
Among the most significant variables for the effectiveness of 
a Web-based payment system is immediacy.    The First Virtual 
system requires e-mail authentication of all orders ¾ creating a 
time lag that may encourage consumers to second-guess their 
purchases. 
218.
The strength of the First Virtual Internet Payment System lies 
in its ability to better handle merchant-initiated transactions.    E-
mail latency hinders the immediate gratification of Web buyers, 
but follow-on email-based correspondence can become 
transactional by simply using a First Virtual PIN. 
219.
Such e-mail transactions may be useful for magazine 
subscription renewals, software upgrade solicitations, shareware 
sales, relationship (One-to-One) marketing, donation services, and 
bill presentment.
220.
First Virtual has built a proprietary messaging system to 
enable relationship marketing on the Internet ¾ something the 
55
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
traditional retail and direct marketing industries have been doing 
for years with great success.
221.
Aberdeen believes that the primary value of First Virtual 
software will be to serve email-based transactional services.    For 
example, the FV system allows people or businesses that cannot 
attain merchant status from credit card companies to sell online.    
The system also allows merchants to embed transactions into 
promotional offerings. 
222.
223. Fulcrum Technologies, Inc.
224.
785 Carling Avenue
Ottawa, Canada K1S 5H4
(613) 238 1761
www.fulcrum.com
225.
Fulcrum Technologies is the leading supplier of information 
retrieval tools, knowledge publishing and knowledge management 
applications.    Fulcrum’s text search and retrieval systems help 
organize heterogeneous databases, support rapid search and 
retrieval by end-users based on text string search and Boolean 
criteria, and provide integrated email messaging capabilities to 
support collaborative activities. 
226.
Fulcrum products are differentiated by the range of database 
types which are supported, and the performance of its underlying 
search technology.    The Fulcrum search engine is used by several 
EC suppliers to provide product catalogue search capabilities. 
227. GE Information Services
228.
401 North Washington Street
Rockville, MD 20850-1785
(800) 758-5804
www.geis.com
229.
GE Information Services (GEIS) is a global provider of 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and value-added Electronic 
Commerce products and services.    GEIS has been the market 
leader the EC industry for over three decades and supports over 
40,000 EDI trading partners, the largest global trading network in 
the world. The company’s core competencies include EDI, Data 
Network Services, Purchasing/Supplier Management, Marketing 
56
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
and Sales Management.    It’s strengths include its private, value-
added network, its world-wide presence ¾ which enables it to 
provide integration consulting services in 42 countries ¾ and its 
global knowledge and skill base in establishing business system-to-
business system inter-operability using EDI technology 
230.
GEIS is a subsidiary of the General Electric Company, the 
most profitable company in the world in 1997.    GEIS provides 
services to many of GE’s business units.      That relationship 
provides GEIS with: a stable core business which is, by itself, larger 
than most of the existing EC suppliers; a close working relationship 
with GE’s manufacturing business that provides continuing input to 
product definition and acts as early test sites for new EC product 
initiatives;    New EC initiatives, and the substantial financial 
resources of the most profitable company in the world.
231.
GEIS has steadily evolved from a Value-Added Network and 
EDI services provider into an organization which is leading the 
charge, directly and through partnerships, into the New EC frontier. 
It has variety of traditional EDI products and services, a number of 
value-added services built around its worldwide private network, 
and has major initiatives to deliver Internet-enabled supply chain 
management capabilities integrated with its value-added network. 
It also remarkets the Netscape CommerceXpert products.
232.
233. Harbinger Corporation
234.
1055 Lenox Boulevard
Atlanta, Georgia 30319
(404) 841-4334
www.harbinger.com
235.
Harbinger Corporation (NASDAQ:HRBC) is a leading provider 
of both traditional EC and New EC solutions. Harbinger supplies 
EDI translation and message server software, value-added network 
services, vertical industry EC programs, trading partner program 
management and roll-out services, EC process reengineering, 
electronic messaging, Internet connectivity, Web site development 
and interactive marketing tools.      With its purchase of Premenos 
in 1997, Harbinger became a leader in Internet EDI as well as EDI 
servers for the AS/400 marketplace. Harbinger also offers a 
comprehensive set of Internet and Extranet-based procurement 
products (the “Trusted Link Procurement” product family).    The 
TLP products provide a significant supplier management capability 
57
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
which provides catalog integration for more than four hundred 
suppliers of MRO goods and services. 
236.
The company is differentiated by the breadth of its product 
and service offerings, its vertical industry services and expertise, a 
focus on mid-sized organizations, and the quality of its value added 
EC program management services and network.    With revenues at 
an annualized rate of over $120m in Q1’98, Harbinger is one of the 
largest companies devoted exclusively to Electronic Commerce.
237.
238. IBM Corporation
239.
Route 100 
Somers, New York 10589
(914) 784-5485
www.internet.ibm.com/commercepoint/net.commerce
240.
When electronic commerce involves the heart of IS, IBM 
remains on every short list.    High-end electronic commerce 
solutions often require substantial investment in customization, 
transaction processing, and systems integration.    IBM is a trusted 
supplier of each of these capabilities.    IBM has web hosting, work 
flow management, and transaction processing products, 
experienced systems integrators, and strong world-wide 
distribution and support. It has resources which cover the 
complete electronic commerce spectrum ¾ a wide range of 
application requirements, multiple operating systems support, and 
a large services organizations.    IBM business partners and Web 
affiliates (systems integrators) and IBM's Global Services are 
already implementing electronic commerce on a large scale in the 
retail (especially internationally), oil, energy, distribution, 
manufacturing, and banking industries. 
241.
Net.Commerce is a catalog-centric suite of tools for building, 
maintaining, and deploying Internet sales.    It is sold as a stand-
alone product with connectivity to key IBM transactional 
middleware such as IBM's Transaction Server (formerly CICS), MQ 
Series, and major ERP systems.    Net.Commerce is being sold 
directly and through distribution channels to compete with 
Intershop, iCat, and Microsoft Site Server ISVs in the sales catalog 
application space.
242.
IBM is also marketing Lotus Domino as a commerce solution. 
Domino Merchant offers a means of creating a basic storefront.    
58
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
Lotus Domino may also be used in conjunction with Net.Commerce 
as a means of extending its groupware and document management 
features to the web for the purposes of providing web-based 
customer service within the Lotus Notes installed base. 
243.
Aberdeen research shows rapid acceptance of Net.Commerce 
among Internet merchants.    Net.Commerce is best suited as a 
stand-alone mid-range product or as a toolset for constructing 
customized, medium-scale EC applications; it’s performance 
appears to have limits at the present time (Q2 ’98) and has not been 
demonstrated as supporting the largest scalability requirements ¾ 
but Aberdeen expects this limitation to be removed soon with the 
expected release of an IBM web application server. 
244.
245. iCat Corporation
246.
1420 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1800
Seattle, Washington 98101-2333
(206) 505.8800
www.icat.com
247.
iCat's products are specifically intended for companies that 
want to set up an Internet storefront by publishing a commercial 
catalog online, be it for business or consumer buyers.    Aberdeen 
research has identified iCat as a leader in meet mid-range Internet 
sales automation requirements. 
248.
ICat has established a strong position in the market.    Strong 
indirect channel development and ISP partnerships have given iCat 
a strong position in the early market for Internet sales automation. 
Powerful channel relationships with more than 300 Value-Added 
Resellers (VARs), Web developers, ISPs, and systems integrators 
effectively expose iCat to the small and medium-sized companies.    
Finally, recent agreements with Ingram Micro, Tech Data, and 
Hewlett-Packard to distribute iCat software should further solidify 
iCat’s share of smaller online merchants and corporate intranet 
developers.    iCat should continue to sell effectively to the mid-
range sites because it provides the industry's best catalog 
publishing tool. 
249.
Aberdeen research indicats that the architecture of iCat 
Electronic Commerce Suite 3.0 is best suited for medium-range 
scalability requirements.      What the iCat suite lacks in database 
59
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
and architectural sophistication, the company makes up with 
shrewd marketing and a clear understanding of product packaging. 
The iCat suite contains industry-leading storefront tools and should 
have few problems meeting mid-range demand.    At the low-end of 
the market, iCat has gone to great lengths to eliminate all barriers 
to merchants, including cost in an attempt to grow its base and, 
ultimately, to either up-sell the customers.
250.
251. IMGIS Inc
252.
10101 N. DeAnza Blvd., Suite 210
Cupertino, CA    95014
(650) 843-8094
www.IMGIS.com
253.
The pioneer of ad server outsourcing, IMGIS built AdForce to 
serve the needs of ad sales organizations, advertisers, and web 
publishers of all flavors.    IMGIS has focused primarily on 
developing the best targeting and ad management systems in the 
industry.    While many ad server providers are riding on their 
laurels, IMGIS has been aggressively partnering with companies to 
allow it to increase services to its customers.    IMGIS recently 
secured the exclusive right to leverage the enormous amount of 
user data stored in the Metro Mail and other direct marketing 
databases.    These information feeds will provide demographic, 
psychographic, and purchasing history information on IMGIS 
customers to facilitate high level end user targeting by advertisers. 
IMGIS is currently developing the AdForce+ program which 
represents the first stage in utilizing this data.    User targeting and 
24/7 service and support are IMGIS’ true strong points. 
254.
IMGIS recently merged with StarPoint, a provider of in-house 
ad server solutions.    By merging the two products, IMGIS 
leveraged the technology advantages of each and is now able to 
offer a hybrid, in-house and outsourced, ad serving solution.    
Aberdeen believes IMGIS is well positioned for the future but 
strongly recommends they ramp up marketing to build market 
awareness and mindshare. 
60
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
255.
256. Intelligent Interactions Corporation
257.
201 North Union St.
Alexandria, VA    22314
(703) 519.6805
www.adfinity.com
258.
Intelligent Interactions Corporation focuses heavily on 
providing web based businesses with the tools needed to perform 
high level database marketing through both advertising and 
content.    Intelligent Interactions ad serving product, Adfinity, 
features strong ad serving capabilities coupled with powerful 
direct marketing database features that are used by major web 
based clients.    Adfinity provides all of the functionality inherent in 
other ad serving solutions, but exceeds the competition in its ability 
to integrate with existing databases for customer targeting.    
Adfinity is available for most popular platforms and depends 
heavily on the web server for storage and manipulation of ad 
creatives.    This web server based storage systems improves the 
solutions performance and allows it to serve all types of web based 
content.
259.
260. Inex Corporation
261.
20 Toronto Street, Suite 400
Toronto, Ontario 
Canada M5C 2B8
(416) 214-2250 / (888) 487-INEX
www.inex-corp.com
262.
Inex is a supplier of Internet sales automation software.    It’s 
Commerce Court products are differentiated by their easy-to-use 
Windows NT-centric standards and low cost of ownership.    
However, Inex does not offer the rich storefront management or 
customization features of either Intershop or iCat.    Aberdeen 
believes the company will receive significant marketing support 
from Microsoft and Compaq and expects Inex's products to be well 
received in international markets where Unix experience is hard to 
find.
61
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
263.
Inex will be particularly successful if it can remove the pain 
associated with creating an Internet store and integrate with 
Microsoft’s Site Server software, while meeting the business 
requirements of commerce service providers.    This will be 
challenging due to the complexities associated with synchronizing 
the products without introducing limitations to their flexibility or 
scalability.
264.
Commerce Court is an end-to-end Internet sales solution.    It 
meets the requirements of most small-to-medium sized companies, 
and it is based upon industry standard (Microsoft) technology that 
will last and will satisfy all but the most transaction-intensive CSP 
operations.    Above all, Inex’s competitive edge depends on 
Windows’ ease of use – familiar to legions of Microsoft users and 
developers.
265.
266. Intershop Communications, Inc.
267.
111 Anza Blvd. Suite 205
Burlingame, CA 94010
415-373-1530
www.intershop.com
268.
Intershop's European stronghold is matched by impressive 
gains in US mind share.    Intershop's recent popularity is the result 
of a well-architected mid-range Internet sales and marketing 
application. 
269.
Intershop's use of a central Sybase System 11 database 
distinguishes it from iCat and other mid-range products that 
typically use ODBC or less sophisticated databases such as SQL 
Anywhere.    Aberdeen is also impressed with Intershop's 
centralized management which distinguish the Intershop Mall 
product from other products in its class.    Aberdeen expects 
Intershop to be popular with commerce service providers who 
wish to sell sophisticated storefront capabilities to Internet small 
and medium-sized merchants which share a centralized and 
scalable database.
270.
Intershop's products are positioned to exploit the developing 
commerce service provider channel (CSP) due to their unique 
database architecture and easy to use storefront management tools. 
62
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
271. InterWorld Technology Corporation
272.
395 Hudson Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10014-3669
(212) 301-2500
www.interworld.com
273.
InterWorld's strength lies in its distributed object-based 
transaction processing foundation.    The Object Architecture 
Scaleable Inter-operating System (OASIS) is unique because it can 
handle tremendous transaction volumes, can communicate with 
any database, and depends on no single technology.    Due to an 
abstraction layer, Oasis can communicate via both Microsoft's 
DCOM and the OMG's CORBA object architectures.
274.
InterWorld won several impressive and very large customers 
in 1996 and 1997, but will face marketing and channel challenges 
from the likes of IBM, Oracle, and Microsoft.    Aberdeen believes 
InterWorld's products will survive in the long run for four reasons. 
First, unlike several other Internet storefront startups, the 
company is private and is profitable.    Second, the company retains 
domain expertise from several successful implementations, and a 
staff with notable transaction-processing talent.    Third, the 
company's recent marketing efforts are beginning to bear fruit, and 
fourth, InterWorld's object technology is the best in its class.
275.
276. Mercantec, Inc.
277.
3080 Ogden Avenue
Lisle, IL    60532
(630) 305-3200
www.mercantec.com
278.
Mercantec focuses on front-end    Internet sales transaction 
processing (shopping cart and related functionality) and APIs    
without getting involved in the complexities associated with 
distributed object platforms, catalog publishing tools and dynamic 
page rendering. 
279.
Mercantec was among the first companies to recognize the 
need to change the pricing models and allow commerce service 
providers and developers to have access to basic front-end 
commerce processing with minimal risk.    Mercantec has 
integrated the product with industry-leading HTML authoring 
63
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
tools, such as Microsoft’s Front Page, as well as industry-leading 
development tools, such as Allaire’s Cold Fusion.    By focusing only 
on the basic elements of a front-end, web-based transaction, 
Mercantec can deploy commerce to smaller companies for under 
$100.    Consequently, Mercantec may have more copies in 
circulation than any other commerce system. 
280.
Mercantec continues to expand its installed base with a 
variety of CSP, marketing, and Web development tool partners.    
Aberdeen believes the company occupies and dominates it's niche 
and expects it to become prevalent embedded technology.    
However, Mercantec will also be challenged to create a market 
strategy for such a point commerce product in an increasingly 
consolidating market – the company is a potential acquisition 
target for tools suppliers who need commerce functionality and are 
attracted to the Mercantec base.
281.
282. Microsoft Corporation
283.
One Microsoft Way, 
Redmond, Washington 98052-6399
(425) 882-8080
www.microsoft.com 
284.
The nascent electronic commerce market begs for technology 
standardization, rich ISV applications,    and back-office integration. 
Microsoft is uniquely positioned to meet all three of these 
requirements.    Microsoft is relentlessly pursuing its expansion 
into the enterprise, defining a range of industry standards as it 
moves.    It has adopted a strategy of providing broad baseline 
infrastructure tools and middleware for Electronic Commerce, 
while relying on ISV partners to create a broad range of EC 
applications.      Only IBM and Netscape have similarly broad web 
technology foundation-ware ¾ but they lack the leverage over the 
enterprise to define standards in the way which is exercised by 
Microsoft due to its control of the desktop and lag behind in 
establishing effective ISV software programs.
285.
Microsoft is well on its way to establishing the standard for 
mid-range and low-end demand-side EC, and will continue its foray 
into enterprise computing.    It has carefully crafted an underlying 
Site Server Commerce Edition to provides a rich range of services 
to its ISV’s.    Aberdeen believes that, with the maturation of MSTS, 
64
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
MSMQ, and Wolfpack, that Microsoft price/performance will 
become a driving force in the EC software market.    As the 
performance and availability of Site-Server applications increase, 
the parallel and distributed nature of Internet application should 
play to the conventional Redmond price/performance strengths at 
even surprisingly large Internet sites.
286. NetGravity, Inc.
287.
1700 S. Amphlett Blvd., Suite 350
San Mateo, CA    94402-2715
(415) 655-4777
www.netgravity.com
288.
NetGravity is a proven leader in providing software solutions 
to manage advertising needs for web sites.    NetGravity’s AdServer 
3.0 is an in-house ad serving solution that manages on-line ad 
inventory, has the ability to dynamically target ads based on 
numerous information sources, and provides real-time campaign 
reports to advertisers.    NetGravity’s core focus is to provide ad 
serving solutions based on constantly evolving market needs.
289.
One of NetGravity’s core differentiaters is its Open Targeting 
Architecture. NetGravity realizes that sites obtain and store user 
data in a number of ways so their targeting engine has been built to 
be fully customizable using C++ code.    NetGravity has also 
included automated management processes (automated 
maintenance, log file uploads, performance reports, etc), reliable 
process monitoring, and proactive administration notification to 
insure that AdServer 3.0 will run as efficiently as possible with 
minimal administrative staff.
290.
AdServer 3.0 can be configured as a network solution and is 
also able through a NetGravity outsourcing program. 
291.
292. Netscape Communications Corporation.
293.
501 East Middlefield Road
Mountain View, CA 94043-4042
(650) 542-3200
www.netscape.com
65
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
294.
Netscape is regarded as a pioneer and leader in Internet 
middleware.    Much of the early and continuing investment in 
Netscape Internet middleware reflects investment to develop 
custom Electronic Commerce applications.    Thus Netscape enters 
the application market as, arguably, one of the three largest 
electronic commerce software suppliers in the world ¾ in the 
company of IBM and Microsoft ¾ with annual revenues over $530 
million.      In late 1997 Netscape acquired the GEIS interest in their 
Actra joint venture, which developed the CommerceXpert family of 
EC applications for Internet Sales, Intenet Publishing, Internet 
Procurement and Internet EDI.    If it successfully markets these 
products, Netscape may have found an effective way to leverage its 
underlying technology to deliver significantly differentiated value-
add ¾ in the form of enterprise business applications¾ a 
differentiation of    immense importance in its continuing no holds 
barred battle with Microsoft.
295.
The CommerceXpert product suite is notable for its breadth, 
the depth of its individual offerings, and a robust infrastructure 
built primarily on Netscape technology and network computing 
architecture standards.    Because of its breadth, the product family 
competes with nearly every point solution in the EC market. 
296.
Netscapes’s acquisition of Actra signals Netscape’s clear 
intent to deliver fully functional applications as well as the 
supporting middleware infrastructure. The Netscape Application 
Products Division, which owns the CommerceXpert product family, 
was created in late 1997 following the acquisition of the GE interest 
in Actra Corp..    Actra was a joint venture of Netscape    and GE 
Information Services which was established in early 1996 to 
develop electronic commerce applications designed specifically to 
run over the Internet, Extranets and Intranets.
297. OneSoft
298.
7010 Little River Turnpike, Suite 410
Annadale, VA 220030-3241
(703)916 7448 
www.onesoft.com
299.
OneSoft is a supplier electronic commerce application 
components and middleware.    Its Empire Commerce Server 
provides a transactional foundation for EC applications, and 
includes capabilities supporting: personalization of catalogs; 
management and display of dynamic content; sales order 
management; sales transaction processing; sales order customer 
66
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
support; and integration with fulfillment systems.    Additional 
groupware capabilities are also supported, including electronic 
mail, conferencing and chat rooms, and document library 
management.
300. Open Market, Inc.
301.
One Wayside Road
Burlington, MA 01803
(617) 949-7000
www.openmarket.com
302.
Open Market stands apart as the largest publicly traded ISV 
(NASDAQ: OMKT) dedicated to sales and marketing EC application 
software.    The core of the Open Market product family is OM 
Transact, a distributed transaction processing system for Internet 
Sales and Marketing.    Rather than building the system based upon 
a distributed object-based middleware, Open Market from the 
beginning bet on the genuinely open HTTP Web protocol.    It is the 
first company to establish intellectual property rights in the EC 
space through u.s Patents.
303.
In addition to its own proprietary transaction processing, 
Open Market is also selling applications for industrial catalogs and 
publishing.    Open Market's foray into the business-to-business 
catalog space will face intense competition from all high-end and 
some mid-range commerce application platform suppliers.
304.
Open Market is in the process ramping up its industrial 
catalog publishing applications while continuing to sell OM 
Transact to large telecommunications companies and ISPs ¾ so 
called “Commerce Service Provider” (CSP) organizations.      
Aberdeen has previously criticized Open Market’s ability to deliver 
deployable solutions to smaller merchants through its CSP 
customer base; this criticism has been put to rest by the recent 
acquisition of Icentral, which will provide an easy to use and mass 
deployable EC merchant solution for the low and middle segments 
of the market. 
305.
Open Market remains the market leader in the CSP channel 
and now has a complete product line with both the easy-to-use and 
manage storefront tools as well as the back end transaction 
management system.
306.
67
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
307. Oracle Corporation
308.
500 Oracle Parkway
Redwood Shores, CA 94065
(650) 506-7000
www.oracle.com
309.
While late to market, Oracle's Internet Commerce Server 
(ICS) delivers most of the core features for demand-side commerce 
application platforms (CAPs). Oracle will leverage core database 
technology, a new object framework (the Oracle Network 
Computing Architecture), and its strong professional services 
organization to serve high-end commercial Web sites. 
310.
Oracle's ICS relies exclusively on the Oracle7 database.    
Aberdeen finds that most enterprise-scale Web integration is done 
through applications, but that sites that tap many databases to 
display a catalog may require access to other suppliers' databases. 
Oracle's Network Computer Architecture (NCA) is an object 
framework that will allow users to plug in ICS if they already have 
a Web Application Server from Oracle, or to buy the ICS bundle. 
311.
Aberdeen believes the company remains exceptionally well 
positioned because of their cross-product leverage, professional 
services, and long experience with production systems and the 
people who have to run them. 
312.
While late to market, Oracle's Internet Commerce Server 
(ICS) delivers most of the core features for Internet sales and 
marketing applications. Aberdeen believes Oracle's NCA and more 
than 6,000 consultants in more than 45 countries are the primary 
competitive advantage of ICS over smaller commerce application 
platform companies.    However, Oracle has yet to win widespread 
support for ICS in the CSP market or attract large numbers of ISV’s 
in a way which parallels its database business;    feedback to 
Aberdeen from early users of the Oracle application server would 
be best characterised as “lukewarm.”
313.
314. Real Media Inc.
315.
270 Commerce Drive
Suite 6000
Fort Washington,    PA    19034
(215) 654-8376
www.realmedia.com
68
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
316.
Real Media’s Internet advertising solution, Open AdStream, 
was developed to meet the specific needs of Internet publishers by 
providing an ad management, delivery, and reporting system 
which runs on a web server.    By performing all ad management, 
delivery, and reporting on-line, Open AdStream boasts ease of use, 
performance, and flexibility.    Real Media has partnered with user 
profiling and targeting companies to help ad managers target web 
surfers on a wealth of demographic data.    Open AdStream has also 
developed one of the strongest ad inventory management and 
reporting tools on the market today.    By automatically computing 
projected growth rates for each page of a site based on the past 
four weeks of activity, the Inventory Manager can project traffic 
numbers in the future.    This insight, accompanied by detailed 
traffic reports and powerful targeting capabilities, helps ad sales 
forces to sell as much inventory as possible at the highest CPM rate. 
Open AdStream is a powerful ad serving solution delivered at a 
reasonable price by not forcing publishers to buy additional 
hardware or software ¾ a web server is all you will need. 
317. Requisite Technology
318.
4888 Pearl East Circle, Suite 300W
Boulder, CO 80301
(303) 546 0610
www.requisite.com
319.
Requisite Technology is a supplier of catalog content, catalog 
management tools, and catalog navigation and search tools for 
Internet and Intranet-enabled purchasing and procurement 
applications.      It maintains a centralized catalog database focused 
on MRO requirements and creates custom catalogs for use by 
purchasing organizations, combined with the underlying toolsets to 
navigate and manage these catalogs. 
320.
Aberdeen research indicates that catalog content    ¾ and the 
management of supplier organizations to acquire and standardize 
catalog data ¾ is a “high value-add” component of procurement 
automation.    Requisite is a leader in the MRO space in filling the 
role of “content provider” and one of the few organizations focused 
on content management as its sole business. 
321. SpaceWorks, Inc.
322.
51 Monroe Street
Rockville, MD 20850
69
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
(301) 251-4136
www.spaceworks.com
323.
SpaceWorks develops and markets Internet-enabled 
applications automating the marketing and sales-to-order 
processes, including real-time transaction processing.      Their 
OrderManager product has been developed and is currently 
focused on the wholesale distribution industry  particularly 
computer products, food and beverage, pharmaceutical and 
medical supplies, and industrial parts and equipment  as well as 
consumer electronics manufacturers. 
324.
The product is positioned based on its attributes of 
completeness, rapid implementation, and real-time integration 
with existing enterprise business applications.    Its pricing 
establishes it as a product for mid-to-large sized organizations.    It 
competes in the market with similarly-oriented products from 
Connect, Commerce One, Netscape, and Trade’ex.
325. Sterling Commerce, Inc.
326.
Interchange Software 
Group
Communications Software 
Group
300 Crescent Court (Suite 1200)
Dallas, Texas 75201-7832
(214) 981-1100
www.stercomm.com
327.
Commerce Services 
Group
Interchange Software Group
4600 Lakehurst Court
Dublin, Ohio 42016-2000
(614) 793-7000
www.stercomm.com
328.
Sterling Commerce, Inc. (NYSE:SE) is a leading provider of 
electronic commerce products and services worldwide.    Sterling 
provides software and services in four distinct markets:    
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and message management 
software for trading partner supply chains;    financial EDI and 
electronic payment processing software (EFT) for banks and 
corporations; file transfer and conversion software; and private 
network services for trading partner supply chains and corporate 
Extranets. 
329.
As one of the earliest participants in the EC marketplace, 
Sterling has gained market leadership through the depth and of its 
product offerings combined with extraordinarily broad service 
capabilities  including localized EDI and EFT capabilities in six 
continents around the globe. file translation and communications 
software, and internet-based catalog management capabilities. 
70
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
330.
Sterling    has systems integration resources around the world 
¾ an important asset in the race to gain market share in the 
Internet Commerce market.    This fundamental strength, combined 
with the size and profitability    of its EDI business, provides 
substantial resources for expansion f into Internet Commerce 
markets, and Aberdeen believes that Sterling will become very 
active in these markets in 1998 ¾ both through directly supported 
R&D and through acquisitions. 
331.
332. The EC Company
333.
1705 El Camino Real
Palo Alto, CA 94306
(650) 323 7500
www.eccompany.com
334.
The EC Company targets its EDI and EFT software and 
services to medium-sized organizations in the supply chain.    It 
offers a unique value proposition to the mid-range market:    well-
engineered, object-oriented software which reduces the investment 
in technical expertise required to implement and maintain EDI and 
EFT enablement.    It’s marketing strategy aggressively seeks market 
penetration and transaction volume by changing the fundamental 
economics of EDI for its trading community. 
335.
The EC Company stands out among EDI suppliers as different 
 from its marketing plan, which utilizes a low 
cost-to-implement/low transaction cost model designed to attain 
market share and transaction volume  to its    distribution strategy  
which relies heavily on strategic alliances and includes embedded 
versions transparently integrated into a number of enterprise 
business application products. 
336.
337. TRADE’ex Electronic Commerce Systems, Inc.
338.
100 South Ashley Drive. Suite 2050
Tampa, FL 33602
(888) 487-2339
www.tradeex.com
71
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
339.
TRADE’ex is a supplier of sales and procurement software 
supporting electronic commerce for trading networks over TCP/IP 
Extranets and the Internet.      TRADE’ex products are developed in 
Java based on a thin client architecture  one of the first product 
families to reach General Availability in the market with the “pure 
Java” standard ¾ although an HTML client is in the wings to meet 
the requirements of Windows 3.1 clients. 
340.
The TRADE’ex products provide automation for corporate 
procurement intranets and extranets, as well as management of 
virtual marketplaces for wholesalers, distributors, and market-
makers.      The company has entered into content and supplier 
management relationship with Requisite Technology, and is one of 
the first companies to fully integrate the logistics capabilities of 
UPS into its application family. 
341.
342. TSI Software, Inc..
343.
45 Danbury Road
Wilton, CT 06897
(203) 761-8600
www.tsisoft.com
344.
345.
TSI International is a supplier of system-to-system data 
translation and EDI products.    Privately held, the company’s gross 
revenues are estimated to be in the $18-22m range for the year 
ending in December, 1996. One of the early participants in the EDI 
market, TSI’s software is currently installed at over 10,000 sites.    It 
has achieved significant market penetration in the health and 
hospital marketplace through its management of the OnCall*EDI 
program, a turnkey EDI procurement system developed in 
cooperation with Baxter Healthcare, and has implemented a 
number of large hub-and-spoke EDI programs in the computer 
manufacturing sector, including the dealer networks for IBM, HP 
and Compaq.    TSI’s Mercator product line is one of the leading data 
translation systems in the market for linking business applications, 
and is delivered on an OEM or VAR basis by a number of leading EC 
and ERP application suppliers, including:    Actra, Connect, GEIS, 
IBM, HP, American Express, Hyperion and Logility.
72
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
346.
347. US West !nterprise Network Services (!nteract 
Network)
348.
1999 Broadway, Suite 500
Denver, CO 80202
(303) 896 0934
349.
US West !nterprise Network Services has established an 
Internet-enabled electronic marketplace, !interact Procurement 
Services, which serves as a electronic clearinghouse for US federal 
government procurement interactions with potential suppliers and 
selected vendors of goods and services to the government. 
350.
!interact Procurement Services provides potential suppliers 
to the government with the ability to search the daily procurement 
notices of the US government, issue formal electronic bids in 
response to those notices and, subsequently, to receive electronic 
PO’s, issue electronic shipment notices, and receive change orders, 
using an underlying EDI protocol.    The service is a timely response 
to the federal requirements for submission of invoices via EDI 
which take effect this year. 
351.
352. VeriFone, Inc
353.
Three Lagoon Drive
Redwood City, CA 94065-1561
(650) 591-6500
www.verifone.com
354.
VeriFone, a subsidiary of Hewlett Packard, is focused on 
providing end-to-end Internet payment based upon SET and other 
industry standards.    Over the long term, the company is better 
positioned than most Internet-based payment companies because it 
provides the hardware and software necessary for Internet sales, 
conventional point-of-sale credit and debit card terminals, and 
smart cards. 
355.
In the case of Internet payment, VeriFone is a software 
company that was marketing its products as a financial service via 
banks.    Considering the banks' relationships with their customers, 
the channel strategy seems to make sense.    Conversely, CyberCash 
73
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
is a financial services company (it charges a transaction fees for 
revenue) that is marketing itself as a software company.    The 
software sales model is winning more customers.    VeriFone 
recognizes that the initial channel was not productive, and is 
aggressively pursuing OEM relationships with all major suppliers 
of commerce application platforms. 
356. 24/7 Media
357.
300 Park Ave.,    19th Floor
New York, NY    10022-7402
(212) 752-3928
www.petrynetwork.com
358.
24/7 Media is the result of a merger between Internet 
advertising and on-line marketing firms Petry Interactive, Katz 
Millennium Marketing, Interactive Imaginations, and the producers 
of Riddler.com.    These firms, each influential market leaders in 
their own way, bring strategic business practices together to form a 
powerful interactive advertising sales network.    24/7 provides sites 
with the full service ad network capabilities of campaign planning, 
buying, trafficking and reporting while providing each individual 
in the process access to real-time campaign management.    24/7 
encourages advertisers to take advantage of the full network of 
sites by performing run-of-site buys as well as to pin-point target 
thosesites which represent their demographic target.    The 24/7 
staff will assist media buyers in developing innovative and 
effective advertising campaigns using banners, sponsorships, 
buttons, and promotions.
359.
24/7’s strongest assets are its sales force and network sites.    
In order to compete effectively in the wake that DoubleClick has 
created, 24/7 needs to increase their marketing effort to help 
advertisers see how 24/7 will deliver the best campaigns for their 
advertising dollars.
360.
361. 7Software
362.
3045 Park Boulevard
Palo Alto, CA 94306
(650)367.7773
www.7software.com
74
Electronic Commerce Practice Summary
AberdeenGroup 
363.
7Software is a supplier of procurement automation.    The 
company markets Company Store, which automates the purchasing 
of MRO goods over corporate Intranets. 
364.
The Company Store was released to general availability in    
Q1’98, and is the company’s first product. It supports a multi-
supplier catalog with limited metadata and work flow management 
capabilities as well as a full shopping basket and transactional 
capability using messaging interfaces.    The product is based on a 
Microsoft Site Server Commerce Edition foundation, and traces its 
historic roots to a custom application developed by 7Software 
founders for Microsoft’s internal procurement requirements. 
365.
75
