Information Technology                                                                August 3, 2006


               IBM + Webify = Industry SOA Application Jumpstart
              Hypothesis
 IBM Software Group’s acquisition this week of Webify Solutions catalyzes the nascent market for
 value-added SOA application development capabilities aimed squarely at specific vertical
 markets. What does IBM know that the rest of the SOA development software market needs to
 grasp?


          Aberdeen Analysis
 Your Peers are Building Composite Applications Using Web Services
 Our recent study, ESB and SOA Middleware, found that 90% of Global 5000 businesses will exit
 2006 with SOA planning, design, or programming activities underway. About half our survey
 participants said they were building SOA applications using web services and lightweight SOA
 tools — hence the term we coined, SOA Lite. The most common activity is building new
 composite applications across custom-built and/or third-party applications using general-purpose
 SOA development tools. In fact, IT developers are so enthusiastic that one-third of organizations
 are planning four or more SOA projects in 2006.
 Flaws in Your Peer’s Strategy
 We do not doubt for a minute that the SOA Lite projects underway are undertaken sincerely. The
 fact is that SOA technology for providing integration via web services is considerably more
 productive than what prior technology allowed. Moreover, line-of-business executives have been
 demanding more agility from the IT department for years — and now they’re starting to get that
 agility. The question to ask, in spite of all the enthusiasm, is whether the current approach to
 SOA development by many organizations will stand the test of time.
 Enterprise Applications Need Enterprise SOA
 Since many of the composite applications being built with web services are used to record,
 transact, and manage the organization’s business, it goes without saying that these applications
 demand the same level of consideration of other business- and mission-critical enterprise
 applications. That is to say they need enterprise SOA technology. We define Enterprise SOA as
 applications that use SOA middleware software to bolster services with an enterprise service bus
 (ESB), repository, management, governance, and life-cycle development tools. These are not
 used in SOA Lite, and mean that SOA Lite applications may not sustain common IT failures, or
 follow company or mandated policies.
 IBM’s WebSphere suite of SOA infrastructure software meets the definition of Enterprise SOA,
 and is an exemplar of what enterprise application developers should be using.




                                Click here to visit Aberdeen’s Information Technology research
        Announcement
                                channel.
                                                         IBM + Webify = Industry SOA Application Jumpstart
Market Alert                                                                                       Page 2



 Where are the Industry Service Building Blocks?
 Missing from general-purpose SOA developer toolkits are service component building blocks
 that understand the core business process orientation of specific vertical markets. All businesses
 have customers, but insurance customers have policies while banking customers have loans,
 credit cards, and deposits. This is obvious, but an SOA toolkit — such as the Eclipse integrated
 developer environment (IDE) — without an inkling of what processes are common in the
 business, are bare bones at best. As a result, business applications programmers must invest time
 and effort in defining the basic business-process service building blocks before they can add
 value in new application development specific to the organization’s needs.
 Webify Solutions Add Industry Building Blocks to Industry Applications
 Webify provides pre-built, customizable SOA software parts, models, and business policies that
 can be much more easily and quickly assembled by applications programmers into tailored
 applications. If the project is building a deck onto a house, Webify would be a trip to the lumber
 yard for pre-measured lumber “components,” while everyone else heads to the woods with an
 axe and a saw.
 Webify provides comprehensive solutions for composite business services in the insurance,
 healthcare, banking, and telecommunication markets. All these markets are covered in IBM’s
 industry-oriented go-to-market strategy.
 Webify Solutions Add Industry Building Blocks to IBM WebSphere and Rational
 The initial Webify solutions for IBM WebSphere SOA middleware and IBM Rational developer
 lifecycle tools will encompass the insurance and healthcare industries. Subsequent composite
 business services are under development for banking, telecommunications, and the public sector.
 The application solutions are all built on Webify’s industry application fabric, which abstracts
 many of the system-level interfaces.
 Webify plugs neatly into a WebSphere environment, which means Webify can be managed by
 IBM Tivoli and integrate with people and process collaboration products from IBM Lotus.
 Finally, the Webify composition studio and related business services repository fit into the IBM
 Rational developer architecture for modeling and assembling components.
 In This Instance, Synergy is not a Cliché
 As a 120-person private company based in Austin, Texas, and Mumbai, India, Webify on its own
 lacked the market footprint to take a good idea, industry-oriented SOA components, to get big
 fast. IBM, showing considerable market agility, can take Webify’s technology and amplify it
 around the globe in products and services as only an $80 billion technology giant can.
 The acquisition answers our question asked in February of where will the industry-specific SOA
 applications come from. With Webify’s technology, IBM jumpstarts a much-needed industry-
 oriented focus on SOA development with high programmer productivity from the start.
 Enterprise Applications: Build or Buy?
 In June, we wrote a Research Brief with this conclusion:
 “The application development business focus should be on optimizing processes that make your
 organization unique: service delivery, low cost supplier, premium customer support, fast
 delivery, etc. The way most enterprises are doing this is to decompose business processes into
 services under the guise of a service-oriented architecture (SOA), which is proving to lower life-
 cycle costs. For the vast majority of organizations, the SOA services

© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc.                                                       Telephone: 617 723 7890
260 Franklin Street                                                                    Fax: 617 723 7897
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112                                                      www.aberdeen.com
                                                                               IBM + Webify = Industry SOA Application Jumpstart
Market Alert                                                                                                                      Page 3



     will contain a composite of packaged and homegrown applications for the foreseeable
     future, not a total re-write.”
 IBM’s acquisition of Webify bolsters our case. Webify will allow for the fast and flexible
 assembly of composite applications that span the home-grown and packaged applications that
 make up so many business processes today. Enterprises can continue to get value from their
 existing application software investments while re-tooling processes as SOA services.
 IBM is in a Category of One
 IBM with Webify is in a class of its own. Long term, we believe vertical-market application
 components, including business process models such as what IBM can offer with Webify, will
 represent a viable adjunct to enterprises that now define their processes using enterprise resource
 planning (ERP) systems such as those from SAP, Oracle, Infor, and Lawson. Oracle’s process-
 model-driven Fusion applications are expected next year. Vitria’s vertical applications may gain
 more consideration now that IBM is blessing the concept of flexible customization. But missing
 from this competitive playing field to date is HP, which has had outstanding vertical process
 models on the shelf for three years and now, with the new SOA infrastructure from the Mercury
 Interactive acquisition, is in a better position to enter the next-generation application space than
 ever before.
 The Webify acquisition, it must be emphasized, also gives IBM’s vertically-oriented global
 services organization a powerful set of products that will engender discussions from business
 transformation with Webify in the boardroom to time-to-market with application programming
 managers to software lifecycle costs with CIOs.
 Enterprise application programmer executives, especially in healthcare and insurance, need to
 evaluate the IBM-Webify offering versus other but more general-purpose IDEs such as Eclipse
 or Microsoft’s Visual Studio. The metric to consider is lifecycle lines of code written. With
 Webify, we believe IBM can make a strong case that programmers will be able to do more,
 quickly, while having fewer lines of code to maintain over time. That spells lower costs of
 application ownership.
 .




                                                      Related Research
  Enterprise Service Bus and SOA Middleware                            Enterprise Applications: Build or Buy? June
  June 2006                                                            2006
  The Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) in                           Advancing Legacy Applications in an SOA
  IT Benchmark Report; December 2005                                   World August 2006
                                                                       Re-THINKING the IBM Mainframe June 2006

     Author: Peter S. Kastner, VP and Research Director (peter.kastner@aberdeen.com)


Founded in 1988, Aberdeen Group is the technology- driven research destination of choice for the global business executive.
AberdeenGroup has over 100,000 research members in over 36 countries around the world that both participate in and direct the most
comprehensive technology-driven value chain research in the market. Through its continued fact-based research, benchmarking, and
actionable analysis, AberdeenGroup offers global business and technology executives a unique mix of actionable research, KPIs, tools,
and services.
This document is the result of research performed by AberdeenGroup. AberdeenGroup believes its findings are objective and represent
the best analysis available at the time of publication. Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this publication are copyrighted by
AberdeenGroup, Inc. and may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior
written consent by AberdeenGroup, Inc.
