SOURCE_URL: http://great7booksgendocs.blogspot.com/2009/01/samsung-unveils-fastest-mobile-cpu-on.html
MIME: text/html

Books General Docs: Samsung Unveils Fastest Mobile CPU on the Market skip to main | skip to sidebar Books General Docs Friday, January 23, 2009 Samsung Unveils Fastest Mobile CPU on the Market Korean electronics giant Samsung related announced a tentative communicative workstation next to a chronometer zoom of 533 MHz. The federation call the new processor the "world's fastest mobile CPU" and promise it will contribute new function and services all for mobile phone and PDAs . Samsung said the new mobile processor, designed for person in charge handheld deeds and driving force pay out, will be mass produced commencement bordered by the fourth quarter of this year. Aberdeen Group chief research officer Peter Kastner tell TechNewsWorld that the new CPU will speed and enhance handheld functions, such via set of connections of encrypting e-mail and compress digital metaphors. However, he said, Samsung may credibly have jam getting the new processor into phones and PDAs except its fussy. "Breaking into this souk be technically frozen," Kastner said. Samsung claim its new CPU, called the S3C2440, will drive the emergence of new services, functions and multimedia cheerful for mobile handheld devices. The company said the S3C2440 will enable end-user features, such as camera interface, LCD display, USB people and touch-screen precision. Featuring Samsung's ARM92OT heart, the new CPU is a 32-bit RISC microprocessor designed for voluminous performance in a miniature silhouette factor. The CPU draw with the single goal 1.3 volts of power. Developed using the .13-micron business modus operandi, the S3C2440 adopt the new Advanced Microcontroller Bus Architecture, an uncoil bus specification that facts a strategy for the interconnection and government of functional block next to a processor. Samsung said the CPU will mast foremost operating system, equally with Microsoft (Nasdaq: MSFT) Windows CE, Palm (Nasdaq: PALM) OS, Symbian and Linux. With a core speed of as high as 533 MHz, the mobile CPU is faster than the comparable XScale processor from Intel (Nasdaq: INTC) , which tops out at 400 MHz. Samsung said it is in a minute sampling the CPU in 533-MHz, 400-MHz and 300-MHz version. Yankee Group analyst John Jackson told TechNewsWorld that Samsung's new CPU is the fastest mobile processor to date, but he added that microprocessing power is only one of oodles damning factor in powering small devices. "This advanced microprocessing speed coupled with other efficiencies in the architecture, such as power management and access to remembrance subsystems -Â– these be sort of the benchmarks earpiece manufacturer are striving for," Jackson said. "Still, microprocessing power isn't everything." He noted that a debate is taking appearance in the handset industry complete the requisite for a devoted application processor, such as Samsung's S3C2440, versus the use of more robust digital summon processing (DSP) technology. Designed to offer high performance short consuming greatly of power, Samsung said the new CPU also offer a defined flash-based salivate loader to agree to manufacturers use high-density polished flecks memory without the need for spare support chips. The company claim this technique can assistance muffle costs for machinery maker that will not be enforced to configure additional components. "By providing a decide of universal system peripherals, the S3C2440 reduce overall system costs and eliminate the need to configure additional components," Samsung said in a revelation. The Yankee Group's Jackson called the built-in flash element "critical," referring to amount efficiencies and compression advantages. Although he bristly to improved performance from the new Samsung CPU in mobile phones and other handheld devices, Aberdeen's Kastner said Samsung might have difficulty breaking into the mobile processor market. He noted that with proprietary architectures from the like of Nokia and several device makers already committed to Intel's XScale processor, Samsung might not be competent to relocate the new CPU farther than its own devices. "While Samsung can use these processors in its own telephone, breaking into the 400-million-unit-per-year mobile commercial take higher than a briskly processor," Kastner said. Posted by Alloway at 8:11 AM 0 comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Followers Blog Archive ▼ 2009 (12) ▼ February (9) Blacklisted by History: The Untold Story of Senato... Such a Pretty Fat: One Narcissist's Quest To Disco... The Smartest Guys in the Room: The Amazing Rise an... Under and Alone: The True Story of the Undercover ... The Truth About Muhammad: Founder of the World's M... Tesla: Man Out of Time Alexander Hamilton Alexander Hamilton Mistaken Identity: Two Families ► January (3) The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of L... Samsung Unveils Fastest Mobile CPU on the Market Hello today! About Me Alloway View my complete profile