 
 
Information Technology 
July 31, 2006 
Announcement 
Click here to visit Aberdeen’s Information Technology channel. 
 
HP Can Boost SOA Offerings with Acquisition of Mercury 
Market Event 
 
Hewlett-Packard is acquiring Mercury Interactive, a leader in information technology optimization 
software. IT buyers, meanwhile, are asking if HP can win the time-to-market race and extend 
OpenView’s breadth at the same time. 
 
Aberdeen Analysis 
 
Putting HP and Mercury Together 
This move is potentially highly accretive to HP’s OpenView offering around system and network 
management software for the data center. With the IT industry rush to service-oriented 
architecture (SOA) decidedly underway, Mercury brings important capabilities to OpenView in 
SOA management (which Mercury gained through its acquisition of Systinet in January), 
governance, performance, and development life-cycle. This takes HP a giant step closer to 
competing on a level playing field with IBM, and distances the company from competitors the 
likes of CA and BMC.  
HP is already one of the major enterprise service management suppliers with OpenView, and 
Mercury, which has built out its IT optimization products from a development lifecycle base, 
adds significant functionality (Table 1). While, on the surface, the products have a number of 
overlapping areas, they are in large part highly complementary, making the task of functional 
integration far simpler. Mercury also brings developer-oriented capabilities such as application 
mapping and a test quality center. 
Table 1: Mapping HP OpenView and Mercury IT Optimization Products 
HP OpenView Facilities 
Mercury Interactive IT Optimization Facilities 
Application Management 
N.A. 
Asset Management 
N.A. 
Business Service Management 
Business Availability 
Configuration Management 
Change Control Management 
Consolidated Event & Performance 
Management 
Business Availability Center and Performance 
Center 
Consolidated Service Desk 
Service Desk 
Identity Management 
N.A. 
IT Compliance and Governance 
IT Governance Center 
IT Service Management 
N.A. 
Network Service Management 
N.A. 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) 
SOA (especially Systinet registry) 
 
Application Mapping  
 
Quality Center 
Source: AberdeenGroup, July 2006 

 HP Can Boost SOA Offerings with Acquisition of Mercury 
Page 2 
 
 
© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
Market Alert 
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) Technology 
With our recent research showing that 90% of all companies will exit 2006 with SOA activities 
at least underway — and many large enterprises with more than a year’s development experience 
(ESB and SOA Middleware, June, 2006) ─ SOA is at the heart of many software buying plans. 
This fact was supported recently by IBM’s positive growth and financial performance in this 
area. 
SOA involves a new way of developing applications, affecting the entire design-code-test-
deploy-maintain application lifecycle. The SOA operating environment is different too, and 
requires new capabilities to monitor and manage the SOA infrastructure and the application 
“services” running within it. Mercury’s developer heritage brings a tremendous new developer 
perspective to OpenView, which is now operations-focused. 
Information Technology Governance 
Less exciting, but potentially important strategically, is the IT governance capabilities Mercury 
brings to complement OpenView. IT governance software will help some of HP’s largest 
customers. Aberdeen Group recommended a focus on IT governance as one requirement for a 
successful enterprise SOA strategy (The SOA in IT Benchmark Report, December 2005). 
However, the subject of IT governance has no firm definition. Our research shows IT governance 
means different things to buyers: regulatory compliance — especially Sarbanes-Oxley 404 in 
the U.S.; policy compliance, and alignment of IT assets with business strategies and objectives. 
Moreover, IT governance, whatever it means, is not top of mind in our survey research, 
especially among small and mid-size companies. 
AberdeenGroup expects increased visibility and demand for IT governance going forward. But 
today, our research suggests the bulk of the market needs considerable education. 
Enterprise Systems Management 
Mercury products will improve HP’s SOA 
management environment and add needed 
developer-centric facilities to OpenView when 
HP 
integrates 
the 
companies’ 
products. 
OpenView is already a trusted cross-platform 
product at many enterprises, extending far 
beyond HP’s hardware customers. Likewise, 
Mercury’s LoadRunner is widely used to test 
and 
monitor 
complicated 
enterprise 
applications, infrastructure, and client-server 
performance.  
With the Mercury Systinet repository and other Mercury facilities integrated with OpenView, HP 
will have a better product proposition to market against the enterprise systems management 
(ESM) powerhouses: CA and IBM Tivoli. 
Where HP-Mercury Are Best Suited 
HP and Mercury already support a wide variety of platforms, especially Unix, Linux, and 
Microsoft Windows Server. Both HP OpenView and Mercury’s IT optimization products are 
best suited to large enterprises with complex networks, application integration issues, many IT 
development projects and installed systems, and multi-site computing. Small companies (less 
Representative Competition 
 
 
 
 
Governance & 
Compliance 
Amberpoint 
CA 
Compuware 
IBM Rational 
Planview 
Progress Actional 
Enterprise Systems 
Management 
BMC 
CA 
IBM Tivoli 
Microsoft 
Sun 
 

 HP Can Boost SOA Offerings with Acquisition of Mercury 
Page 3 
 
 
© 2006 AberdeenGroup, Inc. 
Telephone: 617 723 7890 
260 Franklin Street 
Fax: 617 723 7897 
Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112 
www.aberdeen.com 
 
Market Alert 
than $50 million in annual revenue) are unlikely to have such complex and diverse IT 
environments, and typically start a product acquisition cycle with Microsoft at the top of the list. 
Will HP Challenge IBM in Mainframe Systems Management? 
Where HP is less attractive, even with the extended capabilities the Mercury products will add, is 
with larger companies that have mixed computing environments, including mainframes. While 
OpenView today can remotely monitor and manage a zOS environment on an IBM System z 
mainframe, HP has not committed whether a further penetration in mainframe systems 
management will be a core focus. 
Aberdeen’s most recent survey indicates mainframes are heavily involved in enterprise-size 
company (at least $1 billion) SOA plans. It’s hard to see HP leading the pack unless it can better 
embrace mainframes, and hence be suitable for all of the commonly deployed enterprise servers. 
Aberdeen Recommendations 
Aberdeen believes the acquisition will bring strength to the HP offering for IT system and 
application management, especially in SOA development, and generally will yield positive 
results to the user community at large. 
Integration is the Key 
One key to the success of an HP-Mercury merger is how quickly and successfully the two 
companies can rationalize and deliver integrated software to the market. Given the 
complementary nature of the offerings and underlying technology, this should not be as 
formidable a challenge as past acquisitions have presented. Perhaps the bigger challenge will be 
assimilating the culture of the 3,000-person Mercury organization into the HP family. Large 
turnover in the workforce could delay deliverables, compromise the intellectual property, and 
undermine the time it will take for the acquisition to strengthen HP in this market. HP and 
Mercury customers will want to look closely at the proposed product roadmap moving forward 
and the timetable for associated deliverables. 
One distraction HP will have to contend with regarding the OpenView integration cycle 
(scheduled to takes place over the next 18 months), is the customer’s distraction at dealing with 
the introduction of Microsoft Windows Vista and Vista Server.  
What’s Next 
With this announcement, HP has clearly demonstrated a commitment to the IT community that is 
─ arguably ─ beyond reproach. While it will take some time to digest this size deal, it’s highly 
likely that HP will remain on the acquisitive path. If HP has its sights on IBM (and the Mercury 
deal certainly takes it one large step closer), drawing on the relationship Mercury had with BEA 
would make for interesting discussions among new and old HP employees. 
 

HP Can Boost SOA Offerings with Acquisition of Mercury 
Page 4 
 
 
Founded in 1988, Aberdeen Group is the technology- driven research destination of choice for the global business executive. 
AberdeenGroup has over 100,000 research members in over 36 countries around the world that both participate in and direct the most 
comprehensive technology-driven value chain research in the market. Through its continued fact-based research, benchmarking, and 
actionable analysis, AberdeenGroup offers global business and technology executives a unique mix of actionable research, KPIs, tools, 
and services. 
This document is the result of research performed by AberdeenGroup. AberdeenGroup believes its findings are objective and represent 
the best analysis available at the time of publication.  Unless otherwise noted, the entire contents of this publication are copyrighted by 
AberdeenGroup, Inc. and may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior 
written consent by AberdeenGroup, Inc.  
Market Alert 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Related Research 
The Enterprise Service Bus and SOA 
Middleware; June 2006 
The Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) in 
IT Benchmark Report; December 2005 
Information Governance: A Much 
Needed Framework; May 2006 
SOA Success Starts with IT Success; November 
2005 
Enterprise Applications: Build or Buy?; June 
2006 
 
Author: Peter S. Kastner, VP and Research Director, (peter.kastner@aberdeen.com)  
 
