QUALIFICATIONS AND BIOGRAPHIES

Aberdeen Group is a Boston-based management consulting and computer research organization.
Aberdeen Group performs specific projects for a select group of domestic and international clients. Each requires a combination of strategic advice and pragmatic, experience-based action plans.
For technology users, Aberdeen assesses technology needs within their own operating and competitive context, recognizing that each organization's objectives, strategy, and tactics differ. Assignments range from supplier-strategy analysis and implementation planning to assisting clients in clarifying the business benefits of specific computer technology.
For technology suppliers, Aberdeen assists in product positioning and rollout strategy; strategic audits and in-depth market-segment research; mergers, acquisitions and restructuring; investor relations and corporate communications; and transaction-processing benchmark audits.
In carrying out its assignments, Aberdeen uses a proprietary, comprehensive analytical framework to provide fresh insight into the complex future of computing from the perspectives of market-dynamics, business issues and technology trends.
Aberdeen's principals are recognized industry figures with over 85 years of high-tech industry and financial community experience. They are quoted extensively in industry trade and business publications. Each is a frequent conference and seminar speaker.
In addition to client-related research and consulting, Aberdeen publishes several periodicals, Aberdeen Viewpoints that summarize its analysis and research findings. Recent research reports cover topics including transaction processing, microprocessor multiprocessing, internetworking, Unix, and computational chemistry. Aberdeen also offers an annual planning service.

PETER S. KASTNER

Peter S. Kastner is Group Vice President of Aberdeen Group, Inc., responsible for Aberdeen's Corporate Computing practice. He is one of the industry's leading analysts of trends in online transaction processing (OLTP), client/server architectures, distributed commercial systems development, electronic commerce, and commercial benchmark auditing and analysis. He is responsible for Aberdeen's series of Distributed, Open Production Systems Buying Guides which guide IS managers in selecting relational databases, client-server development environments, open transaction processing, and client-server platforms.

Mr. Kastner has conducted numerous client studies in distributed operating systems and database management systems software. He is active in Aberdeen's end user consulting practice, working with clients to rightsize and distribute their production systems.

He authored Aberdeen's 1990 study Transaction Processing into the 1990s: The Hardware Suppliers, the 1991 study Evaluating Options in Microprocessor Multiprocessing, and a 1992 study on clustering technology. He speaks regularly at seminars and conferences on topical industry issues, and has spoken on behalf of over two-dozen organizations at over 100 venues.

Mr. Kastner has considerable expertise in computer performance and capacity measurement. He was an auditor of benchmarks of and is now an industry advisor to the Transaction Processing Council, has served as an expert witness in several legal cases, and is frequently quoted in the trade press.

Prior to joining Aberdeen Group in 1988, Mr. Kastner was a marketing executive with Digital Equipment, Prime Computer, and Stratus Computer. Over a decade as a consultant and group manager with Arthur D. Little Inc., Mr. Kastner was involved in dozens of complex systems development projects spanning the manufacturing, banking and financial services, health care, and government markets, and including mainframe, minicomputer, and desktop systems.