
                                      AberdeenGroup















                                      Planning for
                                      Emerging Industry-Standard
                                      Platforms Computing
                                      Opportunities


                                      An Executive White Paper

                                      July 2003





                                      Produced in Collaboration with
                                      Intel Corporation





                                      Aberdeen Group, Inc.
                                      260 Franklin Street, Suite 1700
                                      Boston, Massachusetts 02110 USA
                                      Telephone: 617 723 7890
                                      Fax: 617 723 7897
                                      www.aberdeen.com



Planning for Industry-Standard Computing Opportunities


Preface

Industry-standard computing is based on Intel-compatible architecture,
processors, and chipsets.  Intel® Architecture (IA), as industry-standard
computing is also called, is at the heart of the majority of the world’s
desktop, workstation, and server computers.  Technology advancements this
year and next year are creating opportunities for information technology
(IT) organizations to choose computers with superior performance, fewer
bottlenecks, and better administration at a lower labor cost — the “lower
TCO” everyone applauds.  The three critical technology building blocks of
change are memory; systems management; and serial input-output (I/O), which
includes serial buses, graphics, and communications.  The three
technologies will complement advances in chipsets and processors, and go
beyond the typical generation-to-generation evolution.  First appearing in
volume 32-bit servers and high-end workstations, these technology
improvements are followed in 2004 in multi-processor servers, then 64-bit
servers.
This Executive White Paper is aimed at alerting IT technologists and
general business executives to these technology changes and the business
benefits of the technology, so they can better plan for industry-standard
computer acquisitions.  A future, companion white paper will look at
desktop and mobile technology issues.

Processors and Chipsets Work Hand in Glove to Support Enterprise Workloads

Everybody knows Intel as the microprocessor company.  From the mid-1990s,
IA32  servers have taken on increasingly important and now missionbusiness-
critical transaction processing, decision support, web, and office
workloads.  Today, industry-standard servers are used in some of the
commercial and technical world’s toughest computing jobs.
What is less well known, but of critical importance to IT executives, is
that Intel has quietly built a stable of enterprise chipsets, the nervous
system that controls access to I/O and memory by the microprocessor
“brain.”  Intel’s The enterprise chipsets are, primarily aimed at Intel®
Xeon™-based and Itanium servers and workstations with one or two
processors.  Intel also offers a chipset for servers based on two (or more)
Intel® Itanium® 2 processors.  , are Intel’s significant research and
development commitment on enterprise chipsets result in to make servers
that perform better and more reliably.  Intel has shipped more than one
million enterprise chipsets since the beginning of 2002, primarily the
E7501, E7505, E7205 for the Xeon processor family, and the E8870 for the
with Itanium 2.  The field experience gained by Intel over this time has
been cycled through the recent 875P high-end P4 chipset for the Intel®
Pentium® processor, and into follow-on chipset products that will support
future Xeon and Itanium 2 processors.
Over this 18-month period of renewed Intel emphasis on enterprise chipsets,
Intel-architecture servers have continued to gain market share in a
depressed global market.  Enterprise buyers tell Aberdeen that they are
confident in the reliability, performance, and value of servers containing
Intel processors and chipsets, and that they recognize the effort and
commitment that Intel is making.  Moreover, Intel’s chipsets undergo a
rigorous qualification and validation process that involves thousands of
engineers and hundreds of millions of dollars.  This effort leads to high
quality and predictable, stable operation — or data center qualifications.

One- and Two-Processor Enterprise Workstations and Servers

Intel’s Xeon processors are widely used in workstations and infrastructure
servers, which support one or two processors.
Workstations using Xeon processors and the E7505 chipset offer fast AGP 8x
support and over 4GB/second of memory bandwidth.  This combination is
winning design and rendering benchmarks and market share against
proprietary RISCisc-based workstations.
In volume two-way servers, the Xeon processor with the E7501 chipset
supports large real memory space — to 16 GB — and three PCI-X I/O buses,
along with dual gigabit Ethernet support.  The large memory addressability
can be useful in high performance computing applications.  These features
are allowing large, Fortune 500 companies — notably Dell and Oracle — to
claim they can run their complex businesses on clusters of two-way IA32
servers to handle their mail, and workgroup computing applications where
the data set is small and the response time is important.
In 2004, the next-generation Xeon processor, code-named Nocona by Intel,
will debut at higher clock speeds.  Nocona will be complemented by the
Lindenhurst chipset, which is expected to be the industry's first chipset
to incorporate PCI Express serial I/O and DDR2 memory technology.

Multiprocessor Enterprise Servers

Intel’s Xeon processor MP is widely used in mission-critical multiprocessor
servers for 32-bit enterprise applications, office automation, decision
support, and other large commercial and technical workloads.  The Xeon
Processor MP is seen in high-end servers with four to 32 processors,
rivaling RISC traditional enterprise servers in performance — most commonly
at a lower acquisition cost. The Xeon MP is widely used for tier-3
database, transaction processing, and enterprise applications.
By the end of 2004, a new generation of 32-bit server processors will
appear, code-named Potomac.  The Potomac processors will be supported by a
new four-processor chipset, code-named Twin Castle, which will be Intel’s
first recent four-way IA-32 enterprise chipset effort post their re-
entrance into the server market segment in early 2002.

Itanium 2 for 64-Bit Enterprise Workloads

The Madison iteration of the Intel Itanium 2 64-bit microprocessor was
released in mid-2003.  The Itanium 2 is complemented by the Intel E8870
chipset as well as server-supplier-proprietary chip sets.  The E8870
chipset is designed for two- to eight-way Itanium 2 servers.  Larger
systems can also be designed using the E8870 chipset building blocks.  The
E8870 has extensive reliability, availability, and serviceability (RAS)
logic, befitting a mission-critical server well suited for large databases,
decision support, and other enterprise class applications.  In two-way
configurations, some computer suppliers are offering high-end workstations.
The Itanium 2 performance is impressive for a relatively new architecture;
the chip is winning numerous commercial and scientific benchmark tests, and
is picking up market share against high-end Risc/Unix and mainframe
machines.  High memory bandwidth combined with lots of number crunching
capability are one reason why this technology is increasingly used in
scientific/technical applications and encryption.  Large memory address
space, along with other architectural advantages such as EPIC, the raison
d'être of 64-bit architectures, makes the Itanium 2 attractive for large
commercial database-driven applications.

Reducing the Memory Bottleneck


Dual-Processor Workstations and Servers

In mid-2003, memory is based on double data rate (DDR) synchronous dynamic
random-access memory (SDRAM).  With microprocessors gulping instructions
and data at over three billion cycles  per second (GHz), the ability of
memory to keep up with the processor has been a significant technology
problem — and a bottleneck in compute-intensive commercial and scientific
applications.  DDR has the benefit of about twice the bandwidth of ordinary
SDRAM.  DDR266 and DDR333 have a peak bandwidth per memory channel of 2.1
GB/second and 2.6 GB/second, respectively.  Recently introduced, DDR400 has
a bandwidth of 3.2 GB/second; it is often used in two-channel
configurations to achieve a peak bandwidth of 6.4 GB/second.
A memory failure usually means a system crash, with the potential loss of
data, transactions, and customer good will.  Typically, workstations and
servers today use server-grade memory, with error-correction capabilities
that minimally include single-bit error detection and correction (ECC).
Next year’s server memory systems will be more robust.  Aberdeen expects a
number of mainframe-class memory technologies to migrate down from high-end
Itanium 2 microprocessors to mainstream, volume servers:
Memory mirroring keeps two copies of all memory.  If one memory fails, the
other is still there to keep on processing continuously
Spare memory uses a single memory module as a spare, which costs less than
memory mirroring.  When a memory module fails or is taken offline by
diagnostics, the spare is used to maintain the same amount of memory
Memory scrubbing constantly tests memory parity for soft failures and can
alert on a failing memory module, invoking a spare, if present
The benefits of higher memory availability are obvious, given a system
crash as the outcome.  Less obvious is the fact that typical server memory
configurations have quadrupled over the past three years as greater
capacity has been introduced along with lower memory prices.  Many more
memory chips are present as potential failure points compared with the
prior generation of servers.

In 2004, Memory Steps Up to DDR2

DDR2 is the second-generation DDR SDRAM.  It will debut in 2004 with the
label DDR2-400.  One critical advantage of DDR2 over today’s DDR is in
power consumption.  DDR2-400 draws half the power of the DDR400, and 40%
less than DDR333.  As power consumption generates heat and requires thermal
engineering to alleviate it, a 50% decrease in power requirements, at a
time when server memory sizes are growing rapidly, is beneficial, given the
trend towards lower profile form factors such as 1U rack-mounted servers
and blades.
IT buyers will be able to select slower DDR266 or very fast DDR2-400 memory
in servers at the about the same power consumption rates.  In addition,
even value dual-processor IA32 servers are able to configure up to 16 GB of
memory — the memory capacity bottlenecks of a couple of years ago are long.

As a result, higher system utilization, more efficient server
consolidation, and larger applications in memory (e.g., databases) are
increasingly chosen to run on industry-standard servers.

Value Servers Get Server-Class Technology

There are millions of servers around the world that are, in fact, desktops
cast in a server role.  In the past, server-class technology cost thousands
of dollars more than a gussied up desktop, so buyers often ignored the RAS
risks and bought the desktop.  Fortunately, the price gap has decreased
considerably in the past two years.  Looking forward, there is no economic
reason not to buy the reliability, availability, and serviceability of a
true server for a server’s role.
Introduced in Q2-2003, the 875P “Canterwood” chipset with Pentium 4
processors is being used as a performance desktop and entry workstation.
The Canterwood supports ECC memory, serial ATA disk drives, dual-channel
DDR400 memory with performance acceleration technology (PAT), and low-
overhead gigabit Ethernet.  This fall, the Canterwood-ES chipset will
enable true servers at value prices by combining server-grade PCI-X I/O
with many of the Canterwood features.

Systems Management Gets Simpler in a Multivendor World

Aberdeen research shows that about half the total cost of data center
ownership (TCO) is the labor of the people who operate and administer the
systems.  IT management has been increasingly focused on data center labor
costs due to the recession, server consolidation projects, and continuing
demands by executive management to “drive costs even lower.”  Systems
management plays a key role in this business process.
The Intelligent Platform Management Initiative (IPMI) is an open hardware-
management interface that uses a standardized message-passing interface
that abstracts the processor and various devices.  IPMI, in use since 1998,
is one of the tools used to build the systems-management software products
that help many enterprises lower data center server-management costs.  With
over 150 adopter companies, IPMI support should be a checklist requirement
by IT managers when evaluating server infrastructure as IPMI helps enable
management software that work across heterogeneous server system hardware.
IPMI provides IT infrastructure managers with a benefit-rich platform for
managing system hardware in the datacenter:
Instrumentation in server motherboard hardware, a feature not found in
desktops used as servers
Standards-based architecture for systems management, self-healing, and
asset inventory — across numerous hardware and software vendor’s
products—eliminates the need for customized software on diverse server
platforms
Interoperability between hardware and software management
Increased RAS (reliability, availability, serviceability) through a
comprehensive hierarchy of sensors (e.g. temperature, memory allocation)
which report alerts to remote consoles
A common architecture that spans the three-tier server architecture common
in modern data centers, as well as across industry-standard and legacy
computers
Reduction in TCO in data center operations and administration labor due to
the use of common software user interfaces across multiple servers from
multiple vendors
Version 1.5 of the IPMI specification, released in early 2001, is being
delivered in systems today.  Version 1.5 included several important
enhancements over Version 1.0, including a message-passing architecture and
extensions for monitoring and reporting across data center LANs and to
remote locations via serial ports, which  makes it less complex for firms
to deploy a comprehensive enterprise systems-management process.
The benefits of IPMI 1.5-based products to IT organizations will be:
Greater release-level insulation between hardware and software changes.
Newer hardware need not mandate an upgrade to a newer systems management
software release.
Common user interfaces and procedures for LAN/WAN and dial-up locations,
lowering training costs and reducing the opportunity for error
More comprehensive predictive failure alerts allow operations to remove a
failing server (component) before suffering downtime.  Cluster failover can
occur predictably and gracefully.  Self-healing will become more
commonplace.
Because of better failure prediction and self-healing, system availability
at the application level should improve.  With experience, higher
availability levels can be factored into service level agreements.
Improved auto-provisioning will dramatically lower labor costs in
configuring a new server — a common task among growing tier-1 server farms
and clusters
Improved asset tracking reduces the need for physical inventory labor
Storage management and virtualization are supported, allowing for
improvements in harnessing the collective power of data-center servers and
storage, which leads to greater aggregate capacity utilization.
Aberdeen research indicates all of the above benefits are recognizable to
data center operations management.

PCI-X 2.0 Promises to Doubles and Quadruples in Performance

PCI (peripheral component interconnect) is today’s computer industry
standard developed by the PCI -SIG. for interconnecting a microprocessor
and attached devices, such as disk drives and Ethernet controllers, via a
parallel I/O bus.  Devices connect to the PCI bus using adapter cards,
which fit into slots on the computer motherboard.  PCI-based I/O products
are a virtual universal standard in desktop PCs and servers.  PCI moves 64
bits in parallel every 66 MHz bus clock cycle, which limits the aggregate
data bandwidth on a PCI bus to 532 MB/second.  The most recent generation
of servers since 2000 feature an improved PCI, called PCI-X, which doubles
the I/O bus bandwidth of the PCI specification to 1.06 GB/second, while
running 133 MHz.  PCI-X cards are backwards compatible, meaning they fit
into previous generations of 64-bit PCI slots (though not into conventional
32-bit PCI slots).
The PCI-X 2.0 specification proposes to doublefurther increases the
potential bandwidth by upping the clock to 266 MHz, resulting in 2.1
GB/second peak capacity, and again to 533 MHz with 4.2 GB/second peak
capacity.  PCI-X 266 products are not expected to be in production before
2004.  As of July ’03, the electrical specifications for PCI-X 533 had not
been completed by the PCI SIG.
PCI-X 2.0 products will be available later in 2003, and will provide a
needed boost in I/O capacity at a time when processor capacity has been
growing at a rapid rate.  In short, PCI-X 2.0 helps to rebalance the
compute bottlenecks by opening up I/O capacity.

Serial I/O Represents a Fundamental Significant Change in Computer
Architecture in 2004

Serial I/O represents the most far-reaching of the technology changes in
server architecture that will face IT planners in 2004.  Not just industry-
standard servers are affected: all data-center-class server suppliers are
beginning a migration to serial I/O capabilities in 2004  This new
technology will take the form of PCI Express (PCI-E), another standard
developed by the PCI -SIG..  Eventually, almost all desktop and server I/O
will use serial-based technology, so it is important for IT executives to
understand the opportunities and issues.

PCI Express is Serial, Not Parallel

PCI Express is a serial bus architecture, not parallel.  Bits are sent down
the signal cable one after the other — serially — without the
synchronization requirements that parallel buses such as PCI-X need.  The
architecture is layered so that copper, optical, or future cabling can be
used without affecting higher-layer software — an investment protection.
Each PCI-E data bus lane operates at 2.5 GHz, and is referred to as “x1.”
Up to 16 lanes can be aggregated (x16) for a bandwidth of 4 Gbytes/s.  PCI-
E supports up to 32x per single channel, and this aggregate bandwidth can
be divided into a scalable width.  For example, x4 InfiniBand and 10-
gigabit Ethernet will require four, 2.5 GHz PCI-E data buses lanes to
achieve 10 Gbps in throughput.

Attributes and Capabilities of PCI Express

The key attributes of the PCI Express architecture include the following:
The architecture is layered, so details can be hidden from higher layers.
This should lead to a long life for PCI-E, which we estimate at a decade or
more.
There are RAS features that include data integrity checking, advanced error
logging and reporting through IPMI, and hot plug capability.  Hot plugging
new I/O channels has an obvious benefit in reduced downtime, but PCI-E
standards-based hot plugging means it will be possible to mix-and-match
peripherals, which is generally not possible today.  Thus, different
vendors’ A’s fibre channel adapters disk drive should hot plug into another
vendor B’s I/O card cage.
I/O will be consolidated and unified across I/O buses, meaning more
configuration flexibility and less duplication of electronics, leading to
lower overall server acquisition costs.
Advanced power and configuration management will improve configuration
flexibility and on-the-fly changes in computing.  The “computer utility” is
a lot easier and less costly to operate in a PCI-E environment.
Workstation graphics will double the throughput of today’s 8x AGP products,
given the scaleable I/O of PCI-E.
Next-generation, media-based I/O is architected with support for virtual
channels, isochrony, and quality-of-service levels.
PCI Express is software compatible with PCI-X and PCIcompatibility is in
the architecture, so that cross-generation I/O systems will be practical
and provided with server supplier support.
Aberdeen expects the following I/O capabilities to become available in 2004
using PCI-E technology:
Serial graphics will replace the AGP graphics card, delivering 48 Gbytes/ps
over PCI-E, which is twice twice the throughput of AGP 8x.  This will
improve workstation rendering times as well as allow more and deeper
textures in real-time simulations.
  Gigabit Ethernet (GbE) will dramatically benefit from PCI-E, with
improvements of 20% to 30% in send/receive throughput, while keeping CPU
utilization in the 10% to 20% range.   The throughput of PCI Express x8
links roughly doubles that of PCI-X 266 with PCI Express x4 links
comparable to PCI-X 266, with the greatest gains realized when the size of
the data transferred is relatively small (i.e. in Ethernet or iSCSI
implementations).  Improved throughput will benefit server-server
communications in clusters, grid compute farms, and in using iSCSI disk
arrays.
Serial disk connections will proliferate for both the SCSI drives used in
transaction processing and ATA drives used for mid-line storage.  Serial
storage-in-a-box implementations will support both SCSI and ATA drives in
the same enclosure.  Moreover, PCI-E I/O connectors for FibreChannel will
coexist with other I/O cards.
PCI Express x8 links is capable of meeting the sustained bandwidth required
for 10GbE applications
Infiniband, a standard for low-latency data center communications, is
likely to blossom with PCI-E.  Native Infiniband at 4x (10 Gbps) speeds
will no longer be limited by the PCI-X bus.  Aberdeen expects server-to-
server, server-to-storage, and TCP offload engine (TOE) uses for Infiniband
in the data center in 2004.
The PCI SIG is working on a new, totally enclosed Server I/O Module form
factor specification to enable true I/O plug and play while reducing
handling damage. This new form factor is targeted for server and
workstation applications.  NewCard is a standards-based replacement for
PCMIA adapter cards, which are widely used in mobile computers.  NewCards
are significantly smaller and have less complex connectors than PCMIA
cards.  Some servers will support NewCards for occasional peripheral
connectivity.

PCI Express Moves into Data Center Infrastructure Next to PCI-X

From the foregoing discussion, it is obvious that we are at one of those
transition points with no clear guidelines…
Suggestion: Since PCI-X 266 products are not expected to be available until
2004, around the same timeframe as PCI Express, it is not unreasonable to
advocate the transition to PCI Express directly, due to its many advantages
and architectural longevity.

Aberdeen Conclusions and Observations


As IT begins to plan its way out of recession, industry-standard servers
are playing a larger role than ever before.  A new generation of server-
class technology arriving this fall will bring a new generation of
technology to the IT buyer’s doorstep.  Aberdeen fully expects the new
technology to cost less, overall, than current products and provide better
performance, higher RAS levels, and lower operations costs.  Thus, it
really is a free lunch and is definitely worth planning for.








                                  Abstract

White Paper:
Intel Corporation
Planning for 2004 Industry-Standard Computing Opportunities
July 2003
Industry-standard computing is based on Intel®-compatible architecture,
processors, and chipsets, and is at the heart of the world’s desktop,
workstation, and server computers.  Technology changes in late 2003 and in
2004, which the entire computer industry is adopting, will create
opportunities for Information Technology (IT) organizations to choose
computers with superior performance, fewer bottlenecks, and better
administration at lower labor cost.  The critical technology building
blocks of change in 2004 are memory, systems management, and serial input-
output (I/O), which includes serial buses, graphics, and communications.
These three technologies will complement advances in chipsets and
processors, and comprise technology changes that go beyond the typical
generation-to-generation evolution.
This Aberdeen White Paper is aimed at alerting IT technologists and general
business executives to these technology changes and the business benefits
of the technology, so they can better plan for 2004 industry-standard
computer acquisitions.  The contents focus on workstation and server
technology issues.
Peter S. Kastner
Key Words: Intel, IA32, IA64, IA, Intel architecture, chipsets, Xeon,
Itanium, servers, workstations, industry-standard computing, PCI, PCI-X,
PCI Express, PCI-E, InfiniBand, GbE, gigabit Ethernet, serial I/O, SATA,
DDR memory, DDR2, systems management, business IT advisor, planning,
management, IPMI, TCO, total cost of ownership, computer architecture,
computer technology, hardware; planning

Coverage Area: Business Information Technology Advisor (Planning and
Management), Servers


