===== Craig-Barrett-Intel-letter-June-2008.txt =====
﻿Scott-Page Associates
401 Pine Hill Rd.
PO Box 3685
Westport, MA 02790


June 17, 2008

Dr. Craig Barrett
Chairman
Intel Corporation
2200 Mission College Blvd.
Santa Clara, CA 95054-1549

RE:    Experiences with the Next Billion

Dear Craig,

At the reception at industry analyst conference in March, we discussed Intel's efforts in taking personal computing to the Third World, and my own personal efforts in Brazil and Haiti.    Since then, I have had more on-the-ground experiences that I would like to pass on to Intel.

First, I strongly concur with Intel's efforts through ClassMate PC, Intel Teach, and market-driven products aimed at "the next billion".    Intel is not only doing the right thing for its customers, but for the company, and society as a whole.    Keep up the good work, and the extensive but not always recognized efforts to achieve your goals.

The First Problem is Power
Funny how AC power, which in the U.S. we take so for granted, is completely problematical in the third world.    I conclude that endemic power problems are the worst threat to achieving widespread computer adoption in the third world, and should thus be of concern to Intel.

In Haiti, my recorded observations in two cities posit total AC power grid failures at least once a day, and at random times.    Duration is from several minutes to several hours.    In addition, power spikes are common.    The results to personal computers are predictable.    Five, three-year old Dell Dimension computers I inspected are all dead with motherboard failures.    The capital is not available to replace these computers which failed well before expected useful life end.    Rural Brazil, in my experience, has similar problems, and I extrapolate that Intel's data on other third world countries will support my observations.

For example, I am involved in a church project to put PCs into a K-12 school and teacher's college in the city of Jacmel, on the Caribbean.    To overcome the unacceptable mains power problems, our technology team undertook the following infrastructure to support a 20-PC classroom:
	- 35 Kw diesel generator
	- Industrial window air conditioners to cool and dehumidify classroom air
	- Overhead cable drops to desktop computer stations
	- Installed costs including freight and duties are US$25,000.

The environmentally-oriented members of the project are off raising another $10,000 to put in a solar-powered battery bank and inverter.    However, the key technology component not typically mandated in the first world is a UPS which will serve two critical functions: input power modulation and continuous operations during power failures until the backup diesel generator can be started.    This approach adds about $100 per PC seat (and a significant portion of Intel's revenue per PC) but we anticipate longer useful life and fewer repairs.

Issues for Intel:    a combination PC power supply coupled with a UPS would provide filtered DC power as well as power interruption ride-through.    It could easily fit into existing PC cases.    Such a device would lower the add-on cost of a UPS due to component sharing.    And obviously, the huge infrastructure costs are the tail wagging the PC dog.

PC Education Starts With the Basics
It is common for first-world students to get hands-on PC experience during their K-12 years, and to expect college-level students to have basic computer competency.    In the third world, it is common for even college-level students to have essentially no hands-on PC experience.    Therefore, education needs to start with basics like mouse movement, menus, folders and all the UI concepts needed as a base for application-level experience.

Moreover, Intel's teacher training program is proven as a key to wider educational gains.

Microsoft Has an Important Place in the Third World
Outside the U.S., it is common in the first and second world to see deliberate moves away from Microsoft operating systems and applications (e.g., EC).    I am quite surprised at the third world demand for Microsoft software.    The key reason is job skill development.    K-12 education is much more aimed at building usable work skills than in the first world, and here Microsoft operating systems and applications are -- and buyers expect will continue -- thoroughly embedded in business, commerce, and government.

Do Child Laptops have Limited Interest?
I have evaluated EePC, Intel Classmate, and OLPC laptops and extensively discussed the pros and cons with prospective buyers.    Some unexpected observations:
	- The limited screen real estate (less than VGA) is a usability problem.    Too much windowing up and down.
	- The screen size is only personal; a plurality want desktops with large (19") LCDs in order to sit two students 		per PC to maximize equipment utilization.
	- Microsoft applications and Windows (see point above)
	- Concern for theft and loss.    Lack of capital for loss replacement.
	- In general, laptops were of lower demand/interest than desktops.

Classroom PCs Must Come Without IT Infrastructure
Classroom PCs need the same backup, anti-virus, software update, and other mundane but necessary care and feeding as a small business.    However, the lack of IT personnel skills and availability makes even routine IT infrastructure and management exercises difficult.    In short, a server is not much good if there is no administrator or operator trained and certified to keep the infrastructure running.    Our solution to date is to use LAN-level automated backup products.    I think it is a chicken and egg problem where lack of interest in learning about proper IT infrastructure management is tied to a lack of jobs related to IT infrastructure management.

For Intel, the opportunity/challenge is to grow trained IT staff as the third-world market for PC products evolves.

Conclusion
Again, it was a pleasure talking with you and sharing our mutual experiences.    What a marvelous, changing world we live in!

I would be pleased to discuss and amplify my observations with any Intel staff that you want to introduce me to. 

Sincerely,




Peter S. Kastner
Managing Director

Telephone: 508/264-4651
Email: pskastner@gmail.com

