SOURCE: Industry-Analyst-Visionaries-at-AMD.com-4.webarchive

Industry Analyst Visionaries

 

 

 
 

 
 Home | Worldwide 
 | Contact Us 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
 
 
 Select Site:
 AMD
 ATI
 
 
  
 
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Processors

ATI Products

Embedded Solutions

Support & Drivers

About AMD

Where To Buy

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Press Information

Press Releases

Studio 64

Executive Speeches

Articles and Reviews

Partner Press Releases

FAQs

Endorsement Quotes

Photos & Graphics

Video Clips

Success Stories

Processor Pricing

Virtual Pressroom

Other AMD news and information

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Studio 64
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry Analyst Visionaries

Jean Bozman, IDC 

Nathan Brookwood, Insight64

Gaurav Dua, Industry Analyst- Technology Practice, Frost & Sullivan, India

Matthew Eastwood, Research Director, Global Enterprise Server Solution, IDC 

John Enck, Vice President, Gartner

Mike Feibus, TechKnowledge Strategies

Gordon Haff, Senior Analyst/IT Advisor, Illuminata

Carl Howe, Principal, Blackfriars Communication, Inc.

Peter Kastner, Executive Vice President, Aberdeen Group

Roger Kay, IDC

Kevin Krewell, MDR

David Larsson, IT Research, Sweden

Kathleen Maher, Vice President, Jon Peddie Research

Dean McCarron, Mercury Research

Mark Melenovsky, Director, Server Market Research, IDC

Brian Richardson, META Group
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
Studio 64
Industry Analyst Visionaries

 
 
 
 Jean 
 Bozman
 Research VP, IDC 

 
 “Let me make clear that 64-bit computing has been around for quite 
 some time now, and in fact the whole UNIX RISC area already is 64-bit 
 capable. We see it being used particularly for handling large, scalable 
 databases, data mining, data warehousing, high-performance computing, 
 using large datasets associated with scientific computing, visualization. 
 One of the new areas that we see adoption in, is this bio IT area, life 
 sciences, a lot of adoption there, again, mostly in the UNIX space. What 
 we were talking about today is, is there the potentiality that that would 
 get broader, in other words, broaden out to a space where other types 
 of servers would become involved. And clearly we think that will happen 
 over time. It won’t happen overnight, but we think that certainly 
 everybody has their sights on 64-bit computing, and that in fact there 
 might be some new types of applications that would get into the 64-bit 
 space, mostly having to do with handling large chunks of data. And some 
 of them might be, for example, multimedia, video, music, handling all 
 those, and the new and emerging area of web services, in which people 
 are using maybe a PDA or something and looking at that, but are receiving 
 very complex information over the Internet. Now a number of things have 
 to come together as that happens. More bandwidth. More use of PDAs. Some 
 sophistication at the back end, and that’s where we’re going 
 to see more 64-bit computing, to support those services.”

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
Nathan 
 Brookwood

 Principal, Insight64 

 
"Today the 64-bit market is dominated by high-end proprietary systems. 
 This will change dramatically over the remainder of the decade. Industry-standard 
 64-bit architectures will move down to the low-end of the market and up 
 into the mid-range and high-end segments as well. The people who understand 
 this, and who adapt their applications for these industry standard 64-bit 
 boxes, will win big-time when these systems become available. The folks 
 who ignore this trend and continue to focus their efforts on proprietary 
 platforms will soon be in trouble, if they’re not there already." 
 more...

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
Gaurav 
 Dua

 Industry Analyst- Technology Practice, Frost & Sullivan, 
 India

 
"In the next two to three years, one will witness a large set of 
 enterprises going in for 64-bit systems as it offers superior performance 
 in terms of scalability, power and reliability. A 64-bit machine can significantly 
 increase the performance as it can address more memory directly without 
 using complex indexing or register-addressing schemes. Moreover, a 64-bit 
 system is likely to gain lot of acceptance in applications that require 
 large data stores. This would include applications such as CAD/CAM, OLAP, 
 financial modeling, et al."

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 Matthew 
 Eastwood
 Research Director, Global Enterprise Server Solution, IDC 

 
 “IDC's workloads research has consistently shown that many customers continue to deploy database solutions in 32-bit computing environments. Oracle's support of the AMD Opteron processor will allow customers to gain additional headroom for these databases without moving off platform. This approach offers tremendous advantages for many customers faced with expensive database conversions.”

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
Jonh 
 Enck

 Vice President, Gartner

 
"64-bit systems have been around for a while. I think the transition 
 for pervasive 64-bit computing is going to take some time. I think the 
 server side of the market is well familiar with this technology, well 
 familiar with the promises that 64-bit brings to the market. I think the 
 trick is on a desktop, in that segment of the market, this is going to 
 be a big change for them. These are going to be systems that are vastly 
 more powerful than they are used to. So there will be some new applications, 
 new capabilities. So it will certainly spur some new usage models." 
 more... 
 

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 Mike 
 Feibus

 Principal Analyst, TechKnowledge Strategies, Inc. 
 
 
 "I believe that 64-bit technology will bring new and 
 exciting opportunities to the mainstream market. Once you give millions 
 of mainstream users the power to address such large datasets, then the applications 
 are sure to follow." 
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 Gordon 
 Haff

 Senior Analyst/IT Advisor, Illuminata 
 
 
 “Financial services is certainly one market that is likely to adopt 
 [64-bit technology] fairly quickly. Financial services, in the last 
 few years, have been the commercial users among the most open to new technologies. 
 IT is the core of their business and the ability to crunch data and to glean 
 information from that data is really core to their business.” more... 
 
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
Carl 
 D. Howe

 Principal, Blackfriars Communications, Inc.

 

 "Sixty four-bit computing brings something new to a stagnant PC market: 
 simplicity. How will it do this? By: 

 

 1) Simplifying the use of large memories. Today’s 
 32-bit PC programs typically can’t use more than 2 gigabytes of 
 main memory, yet someone editing raw digital photographs in Photoshop 
 can easily consume all that and more. And applications like video editing 
 of a two-hour digital video movie need a minimum of 26 gigabytes just 
 to store the movie. Memories of 32 gigabytes and more would make these 
 programs run faster and easier to debug -- and yet cost only about $3,000 
 at today’s prices.

 

 2) Simplifying programming. Today, PC programmers 
 must jump through hoops to perform seemingly simple operations like creating 
 a report for a database or writing a DVD-R disk. Why? Because they spend 
 most of their time figuring out how to shuttle information on and off 
 slow disks, the only PC storage big enough to store databases or DVD images. 
 64-bit processors allow programmers to write these pieces of software 
 as simple queries and copies -- and make them faster and more reliable 
 to boot.

 

 3) Simplifying innovation. Just as it’s easier 
 to build a highway through an unpopulated countryside than through a city, 
 64-bit computing poses fewer obstacles to creating the next killer application. 
 Prior to 32-bit processors, Microsoft® and Windows® never had 
 the type of market power they do today. 64-bit computing will similarly 
 propel other small companies to stardom as they make things considered 
 impossible today possible.” 

 

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 Peter 
 Kastner
 Executive Vice President, Aberdeen Group 

 
 “The first 32-bit consumer desktops appeared in 1985 when the software world was mired in the world of 16-bit DOS operating systems and applications. Except for the few hardy souls who used 32-bit Xenix (and later Unix variants Unix) applications, the rest of us waited until Windows XP was launched in October 2000 to end the legacy ties to 16-bit software. That’s a long time — fifteen years before the software caught up with the hardware. That won’t happen again to the computer industry. Aberdeen Group expects 64-bit operating support for consumer desktops to arrive over the next year. Early adopters will enjoy some exciting experiences. 

 
 
Hard as it is to imagine, the majority of the consumer market for 64-bit computing will arrive at the end of the decade. The key reason is memory.

 
 
Today’s mainstream 32-bit desktops barely run in 128 MB of RAM, perform adequately at 256 MB, and can run virtually all applications with 512 MB of memory. With declining memory prices, more operating system features, the proliferation of web services, more powerful processors, we see typical memory configurations doubling every three years for the rest of the decade. With processor speeds at 10 GHz and above, the penalty for a disk access will be enormous; so much more data will be cached in memory. The tipping point is in the 2-4 GB area, when traditional 32-bit addressing runs out of bits. We expect mainstream desktops to need full 64-bit addressability of RAM by 2010. Many users will want their virtual memory disk space to exceed 4 GB before 2010. So start planning for your own cinema-realistic 3D user environment now.”

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
 Roger Kay
 
 Director of Client Computing, IDC 
"Aside
 from the fact that you can address more mathematical space with 64-bit
 systems, 
 they also give you greater performance. With 64-bit systems, things like
 weather forecasting are possible. For consumers, gamers
 
 enjoy increased performance on 3D applications. In the commercial space,
 they gain faster execution of existing programs."

 

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
 Kevin 
 Krewell
 General manager, MDR, Senior Editor, Microprocessor 
 Report
 
 “The 64-bit processor question is not if, but 
 when? The 32-bit x86 architecture we have today is the based on the 80386 
 processor introduced in 1985. After 18 years, it’s time to evolve 
 to the next era in client computing—64-bit processing. We can begin 
 to conjecture how programmers will use this new freedom, as 64-bit processing 
 facilitates processing of large databases, bigger CAD models, faster data 
 encryption for Internet security, larger media files, expanded rules for 
 speech recognition algorithms (allowing greater accuracy), and additional 
 caching of data and programs for snappier performance.” -- Kevin Krewell, 
 general manager, MDR, senior editor, Microprocessor Report
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 David 
 Larsson
 Market Analyst, IT Research, Sweden 
 
"64-bitars marknaden tar nu fart på allvar. De kommande AMD 
 processorbaserade produkterna har goda möjligheter att ta andelar 
 med ett bra pris/prestanda", säger David Larsson, marknadsanalytiker, 
 IT Research. 

 
“The 64-bit market is really taking off now seriously. The upcoming 
 AMD processor-based products have a good possibility to take market shares 
 with a good price/performance ratio”, says David Larsson, market 
 analyst, IT Research.

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 Kathleen 
 Maher
 Vice President, Jon Peddie Research
 
 
 "64-bit computing, it's the future. AMD has taken the initiative 
 to push 64-bit into the mainstream and has reset the clock for the transition... AMD has excelled in creating a demand for the near(er) future." 
 
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
Dean 
 McCarron

 Founder and Principal, Mercury Research

 
"The barriers that 64-bit computing can overcome relate to things 
 such as memory addressing. The current 32-bit architectures are limited 
 to 4 gigabytes. 64-bit architectures essentially eliminate any barriers 
 to memory addressing for the foreseeable future." more... 
 

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
 
 
Brian 
 Richardson

 Program Director, META Group

 
"I think we've had 64-bit computing in niche markets for more than 
 ten years. What I see coming is more of a mass market potential to begin 
 accelerating a transition to 64-bit enabled applications, to really take 
 advantage of things like very large memory spaces, very sophisticated 
 modeling and simulation in technical computing environments, and extremely 
 high performance in database and data warehousing capabilities not only 
 for government and research capabilities and very high-end corporate environments, 
 but really more 64-bit computing that is more mainstream."

 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
  
 

 
 
  
 
Mark 
 Melenovsky

 Director, Server Market Research, IDC

 
“I think it’s more than performance. Like I just mentioned, 
 it's the way that IT and data is becoming so pervasive throughout the 
 industry that it's going to require 64-bit computing just to be able to 
 integrate your businesses, your databases, and your supply chain management, 
 and all of these different functionalities. So it's a requirement.” 
 more... 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Rate this page
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 ©2009 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.    |    Contact AMD    |    Careers    |    RSS Feeds    |    Terms and Conditions    |    Privacy    |    Trademark information    |    Site Map
