
                                      AberdeenGroup















                                      Dell Asset Recovery Services: a
                                      Trustworthy Partner for
                                      Eliminating Aging IT Assets





                                      An Executive White Paper

                                      July 2003











                                      Aberdeen Group, Inc.
                                      260 Franklin Street
                                      Boston, Massachusetts 02110-3112 USA
                                      Telephone: 617 723 7890
                                      Fax: 617 723 7897
                                      www.aberdeen.com



Dell Asset Recovery Services: a Trustworthy Partner for Eliminating Aging
IT Assets


Executive Summary

Aging IT assets are a hidden problem.  The decommissioned equipment stored
in the halls, empty offices, or out-of-the-way wiring closets and server
rooms cost money and expose the enterprise to significant risk.
From a financial perspective, stored printers, PCs, servers, tape drives,
and network devices depreciate at 9.6% per month based on their
resale/recycling value, so these assets are not as valuable as IT thinks
and rapidly become a pure cost.  Storage and market value depreciation of a
36-month old Pentium III PC for one year costs about $368.
From a liability perspective, obsolete electronic devices — “e-waste” — all
contain toxic material and have become the focus of significant new
legislation and litigation in the U.S. and Europe.  PC and server hard
drives contain sensitive enterprise, customer, or patient data that must
not be disclosed.  Old IT equipment can’t be thrown in the dumpster any
longer; it must be properly disposed of, at a cost of $387 and up per PC if
you do it yourself.
These two situations — underused depreciating IT equipment and e-waste
refuse management — demand focused management attention and call for a new
process that engages a highly trusted IT asset recovery partner.
Managers should rethink corporate replacement and disposal strategies
because disposal costs will continue to rise, representing an increasing
percentage of the total cost of ownership (TCO) for IT assets.  We estimate
disposal costs at over 25% of the initial PC acquisition cost and climbing.
 At the same time, the most popular disposal strategies used today
represent a very poor risk when confronted with the upcoming onslaught of e-
waste volume and restricted dumping options.
Organizations that dispose of 3,000 PCs or other IT devices annually can
save more than $1 million a year in unnecessary storage and disposal costs
with an asset recovery program.
Aberdeen recommends the following steps in developing an asset recovery
program:
Step 1 — Create a new recovery/disposal strategy that incorporates a
trusted disposal partner.  Getting rid of used IT equipment is not an
enterprise core competency.
Step 2 — Aggressively identify obsolete and soon-to-be obsolete devices and
implement the recovery/disposal strategy while opportunities still exist to
get cash back from the IT asset’s rapidly declining residual value.
Step 3 — Develop a long-term “green TCO model” that evaluates future IT
acquisitions, with proper attention placed on the impact of disposal costs
on the TCO and financing arrangements.
Companies that take a “wait and see” position will find disposal costs
rise, options dwindle, and corporate liabilities increase.  For the new
disposal strategy, look for prospective partners, such as Dell Computer
Corp., that have experience in managing hazardous waste; a proven track
record in managing large volumes and complex processes consistently and
cost effectively; a presence in multiple geographies to reduce
transportation costs; and a financially sound position that puts teeth into
the level of indemnification you agree upon.

External Events Make Action Imperative

IT asset disposal is not a new problem.  IT organizations have been
eliminating computer equipment for years.  However, two issues will make
the disposal strategies of yesterday a recipe for disaster tomorrow: volume
and complexity.
Aberdeen research indicates that there will be a flood of IT assets hitting
the market that need to be disposed of.  More than 400 million toxic
computer devices will be thrown out in 2004, an increase of almost 100
million units over 2002.  These PCs, tape drives, and networking assets
have reached the end of their useful life and will soon swamp the existing
disposal channels and disposal techniques — typically, a combination of
dump, donate, and store.
Rising complexity will test the mettle of existing recycling channels.
Environmental and privacy legislation and litigation has risen to the point
where it can no longer be ignored.  Devices given to charity represent a
privacy risk if disk drives are not properly wiped absolutely clean — an
expensive one-time procedure.  The risk that the PC will be found later,
dumped illegally, is a liability because charitable organizations do not
have the deep pockets that lawyers seek.  Moreover, Aberdeen expects the
legal acceptance of e-waste today to become retroactively unacceptable in
the future.
In short, your organization should avoid directly depositing IT assets into
regional landfills.  Dumping e-waste into landfills is now illegal in
several states and will soon be illegal in most.

Change Your Asset Disposal Process into an Asset Recovery Process

The critical business process change that can literally be worth $500 to
$800 per IT asset is simple: identify and retire underutilized IT assets.
The sooner that old assets are sold off, the more economic value they
retain — PC residual value declines at 9.6% per month.  That’s why stacking-
up old PCs and monitors and leaving them to gather dust is economic
suicide, but it happens all the time because the traditional “sunk cost”
mentality ignores disposal costs that will be incurred in the future.  The
costs associated with data cleansing, shipping and disposal are rarely
measured, and no one is held accountable.

The Aberdeen IT Asset End-of-Life Process

Because few IT disposal costs are measured today, IT organizations tend to
underestimate both the number of steps involved and the complexity, effort,
and cost associated with each.  The following seven steps are recommended
for planning an IT asset end-of-life process.  Your own industry,
enterprise, and political jurisdiction may dictate additional
considerations.

Asset valuation

Someone must establish what the retained value is for each asset.  Should
it be sold or recycled?  Few enterprise organizations have ongoing direct
knowledge of the used equipment market or relationships with brokers and
dealers, so a partner is needed to obtain this information.  Be sure to
consider the source of the valuation data carefully.  If the valuation
comes from the same partner that will sell the asset, make sure that
partner’s profit is not derived from the spread between the buy and sell
price since this will place the partner in an ethically challenged
position.
The Dell Asset Recovery Services (ARS) program avoids this difficult
position by charging a flat rate for selling your assets, and demands the
same from the partners it uses to manage the re-sale process.  This
eliminates any benefit from being derived by falsifying valuation
information.

Identity cleansing $2

IT assets must have all enterprise identification removed in preparation
for asset transfer to the disposal partner.  Either the enterprise or the
business partner can easily perform this “corporate identity” cleansing
because it is usually a simple matter of removing asset tags.

Data cleansing $126

This activity is critical to protecting the enterprise from lost data and
potential litigation.  The process is expensive to perform and is all too
often performed incorrectly.  Recent news reports have demonstrated how
disk drives sold on the used market contain confidential information,
including corporate data, credit card, and medical information.  Instances
of data loss have embarrassed the U.S. Veterans Administration, the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, Dovebid/Viant, and Purdue
University as confidential data was recovered and disclosed from disk
drives.
Aberdeen recommends against the common practice of data cleansing only
specific units that hold critical enterprise data — instead, every disk
drive must be wiped clean of all data.  This wholesale approach guards
against any future privacy headaches.  The only commercially reliable
method for eliminating data is to overwrite every sector of the hard drive
multiple times using varying data patterns.  This makes data recovery
impossible without disassembling the unit and applying specialized tools to
examine the disk surface — an improbable event for discovering general
business information.
The disk cleansing operation requires a significant amount of time to
complete.  The process is limited by the speed of the disk drive.  A three-
year old Western Digital Caviar 8-GB disk drive takes two hours and forty
minutes to complete, while a 20-GB drive takes more than six hours.  While
these times can be reduced using parallelism, a parallel approach requires
a central operation with a special workbench, which requires a high volume
of work to justify.
Costs associated with the disk cleansing operation depends on the disk
size, disk type, the effort associated with using the proper equipment; the
cost of the space needed to conduct the process; as well as the cost of
maintaining the documentation and managing the disk cleansing process,
including random testing, and documenting and communicating results.
Aberdeen has determined that the costs for cleansing disks can range from
$185 to a low of $16, with the low estimate based on a significant capital
investment to automate the process and support parallel processing, a
combination cost justified only with large volumes like those attained by
Dell.  A large enterprise will pay approximately $126 per drive to do it.

Packing/moving $132

The IT asset must be packed, moved to the loading dock for pick-up, and
then delivered to its final destination.  There is always a real cost in
labor and material associated with this effort which is too often ignored.
In a large, geographically dispersed organization, packing and moving can
become an expensive logistics operation.  The device may go through
multiple hops, from a branch office to a regional office and then to home
office for data cleansing and final packing.  These costs are highest when
the device is extremely bulky, heavy, or both (a 21-inch monitor, for
example), when the retained value demands cautious packaging, when union
employees perform the effort, when secure shipping is needed, and when
special packaging and documentation is required.  An example of the latter
would include CRTs/monitors that are defined as hazardous material in
several states.  A California law requires that all CRTs be packaged to
prevent breakage and all transportation documented as hazardous material.
When a PC unit, including the CRT, is packed and shipped to a regional
office for processing and then packed and shipped again to a disposal
partner, Aberdeen estimates the cost for labor, transportation, and
material to be as high as $198.  If multiple assets intended for recycling
are placed on a pallet and shrink wrapped for pick-up by the disposal
partner — the mechanism recommended for Dell ARS customers — the cost could
be as low as $12 per device.  The average cost is $132 per unit for do-it-
yourself, which covers material and handling associated with moving twenty
PCs and monitors with four printers from multiple cubes to a processing
area where they are packed, and then trucked to a regional recycler.

Recycling $48

When the IT asset can’t be sold as used-equipment, the device must be de-
manufactured into components that are sold individually, including the
chips, hard disk, power supply, and switches.  Once the key components have
been removed and sold, the remaining material is sold as scrap.  Anything
left over is broken up and refined back into a raw material and sold on the
commodities market or directly back to manufacturers (see Figure 1).
Revenue earned from components, scrap parts, and raw material is used to
defray de-manufacturing costs.
Efficiency in recycling can only be achieved through large volumes.  The
high cost of tracking and adhering to a complex maze of local, state, and
federal regulations — as well as the acquisition of expensive equipment
that can break-up and recover raw material trapped inside computers (e.g.,
tape drives, printers, monitors, and network devices) while separating out
toxic waste — will make it difficult for small regional recyclers to
compete, unless they partner with firms like Dell.  It is unclear how
smaller recycling firms will fund the research and process engineering
needed to remain in compliance with regulations over the long-haul — an
issue that must be taken into consideration by the enterprise looking for a
trustworthy partner.
The challenge for smaller recyclers is made clear in Figure 1.  Note the
three key areas of expertise required to be successful: market access, the
de-manufacturing process, and participation in secondary markets (used
equipment, components, scrap, and raw materials).

Sales $67

Selling IT assets demands specialized knowledge of, and access to, brokers
and dealers in the used market.  The assets must be refurbished and tested
for proper operation prior to sale in order to derive a maximum value for
the asset.  Buying, refurbishing, and selling used computer equipment is
like any other commodity trading operation — a cutthroat business that
demands nerves of steel and an innate sense of market shifts. Gaining top
dollar for a disposed asset requires the ability to negotiate effectively
in the resale market.
The cost of refurbishment and regional shipping establishes the spread
required to break even.  Depending on the scale and management of the
operation, refurbishment and shipping may be as low as $28 and high as $67
per device.  Cross-country shipping costs are prohibitive.
Compare these $28 to $67 costs to the whole Dell ARS program, which charges
a flat rate of $69 including identity and disk data cleansing, and you can
see the economic benefits of ARS.



Figure 1: A Typical Process Used to Recover Value from Electronic Assets

                                    [pic]

                                           Source: Aberdeen Group, July 2003



Verification/documentation $12

Demonstrating that your enterprise follows a standard practice for properly
disposing of e-waste through meticulous documentation is critical to
protect the enterprise from potential litigation. This should go beyond a
list of what was sent for disposal; records should provide the exact
disposition of the asset by serial or asset tag number.
The Dell ARS program provides the customer with documentation that
indicates the assets were transferred to Dell, that each asset was disposed
of according to all relevant local, state, and federal laws, and that the
disk drive was properly overwritten.  This information is provided by
serial number.

Green Cash — Timing is Everything

Using the numbers above, it costs approximately $387 or more for the
enterprise on its own to properly eliminate one electronic asset without
engaging a partner’s help.  Should your enterprise need to dispose of 5,000
units, the cost will be $1.94 million.  The Dell ARS plan costs only $49 a
unit.  Add $30 for the packing and moving plus the use of the Dell ARS
service costs the enterprise a total of $79.  A service such as Dell’s ARS
saves $1.54 million and eliminates an e-waste headache.
Putting this in terms of purchase price, a typical enterprise PC and
monitor costs $1,200, so the $387 disposal cost represents 32% of the
original cost — a percentage that only increases rapidly as organizations
continue to drive the cost of new PCs towards $1,000.  In summary, the
disposition path followed has a material impact on the overall total cost
of ownership of each device.
Timing is a critical element, as well.  The opportunity to sell an IT asset
in the used equipment market evaporates when the asset’s value drops below
the cost of disposal.  To avoid a hard cash expense, the asset must be sold
at a recovery price that is at least equal to the disposal cost. However,
Aberdeen research indicates that this moment comes much sooner than IT
managers or common financial depreciation tables predict.  The right time
to dispose of a PC is close to 36 months, not the 48 months many
enterprises have been slipping towards.

Dell’s Long History of Recycling

Dell has a long history and deep experience in recycling, and has
established a goal for itself of “Zero Landfill,” that will ultimately be
achieved through improved manufacturing and de-manufacturing processes, and
systems redesign.
Dell’s first official reuse and recycling program, called Dell Exchange,
was launched in the early 1990’s.  Since that launch, Dell has refurbished
for donation or recycled more than two million systems; a number that is
growing rapidly as Dell expands and promotes its recycling services.  For
example, Dell has proactively implemented consumer buy-back incentive
programs and heavily promoted its “Plug Into Recycling” campaign.  This
campaign encourages communities to drop-off old consumer electronic
equipment at a central location for proper disposal at no cost, a service
that benefits the community and demonstrates Dell’s intention to provide
recycling services for any electronic component, from any manufacturer.

Dell Asset Recovery Services: Enterprise-Grade Asset Disposition

By introducing several new processes into its existing re-sale and
recycling program, Dell created the Asset Recovery Service.  ARS is
designed for enterprise customers that have a minimum of 40 computer assets
to dispose of, including desktop PCs, monitors, notebooks, servers,
storage, networking equipment, printers, projectors, and computer
peripherals such as keyboards and mice from any manufacturer.
The ARS recycling and resale offerings protect the enterprise by (1)
delivering a professionally managed and rigorously monitored process that
removes all corporate identity from the physical assets (asset tags,
logo’s, inventory stickers, etc); (2) overwrites all sectors of every hard
drive to protect data assets from exposure, and (3) provides the
documentation that provides details on the exact disposition of the asset
by serial number.
The Dell ARS has three main components: logistics, disposition, and
reporting.  Enterprise customers can reconfigure any aspect of the
prepackaged logistics and disposition options of the ARS service to meet
their exact needs.

Logistics

Most larger organizations have assets deployed across multiple facilities
and geographies.  Transporting these assets safely and without damage is
imperative to retain the maximum value of the IT assets.  While some
enterprise facilities can pack and ship the hardware without assistance,
some request a pick-up from the loading dock, and others may ask for
comprehensive assistance to de-install, pack, and ship the hardware assets.
 The Dell ARS program supports any logistics configuration an enterprise
customer needs.

Disposition

For $49 per unit, Dell will pick up and recycle the e-waste, regardless of
manufacturer.  For assets where the retained value makes them candidates
for resale, the Dell ARS program offers the Value Recovery Service.  The
Value Recovery Service refurbishes and resells the enterprise asset in the
used market, and the full value gained from the sale is returned to the
customer.  To establish a reasonable expectation, Dell provides the
customer with the Dell Asset Recovery Monthly Price List.  This list
identifies the residual value of all the most common PC configurations.
The Value Recovery Service costs a flat rate $69 per unit, and the actual
revenue earned from the asset sale is returned to the enterprise customer
with the asset disposition documentation.
To assure the customer that its confidential data is protected, the Dell
Asset Recovery program uses a tightly controlled and managed process to
overwrite all disk data.  Should the enterprise have systems that contain
trade secrets or other more confidential data that demands a more stringent
data destruction technique, special arrangements can be made for disk drive
wipes that adhere to the Department of Defense (DoD) 5220.22M standard.

Reporting

Maintaining meticulous records is critical to demonstrate long-term
compliance and dedication to e-waste regulations.  Dell ARS customers
receive a detailed Settlement Report within 90 days of Dell taking
possession of the assets.  When the assets are recycled, the Settlement
Report provides a detailed list of the hardware and a certificate that Dell
has recycled the asset in accordance with EPA guidelines.  If the asset is
sold in the used market using the Value Recovery service, the report
provides a list of the hardware and the unit’s sales price.

Aberdeen Conclusions and Observations

This Executive White Paper is really about saving companies money.  Without
a proper plan, companies will spend $1.9 million annually to dispose of
5,000 IT devices and still expose IT to public scrutiny by not recycling.
The disposal plans discussed above can save an enterprise more than $1
million to $10 million annually while making your organization a poster
child of environmental concern.  The benefits are so high; the only
businesses that will pass this opportunity up are the ones that do not know
the opportunity exists.  The question is not if you will adopt a disposal
strategy, it is when and how.
The answer to when is clear.  Even if your agenda is already packed with
urgent projects, disposal needs to be fixed now — before one more IT asset
is thrown out the door as trash when it could be turned into cash.
The how can be as simple or as complex as your organization makes it.
Aberdeen suggests a three-step program in which you pick a trusted partner,
recycle old assets, and establish a “green TCO model.”  The Dell ARS
program is an excellent example of a full-service program that satisfies
step one.  Dell ARS provides an efficient and cost effective disposal
strategy that will save money with little effort.  Dell eliminates the
hassle for a known and very reasonable fixed fee.
Some departments may balk, indicating a desire to implement their own data
cleansing.  This is a corporate decision, but one that should be made
recognizing no enterprise can approach the efficiency of a recycler that
performs the work on
millions of disks.  Doing disk cleansing is a major expense at an average
cost of $126 per disk.
There may also be a desire to retain relationships with local recyclers.
As transportation is a significant portion of overall costs, this may
initially appear appealing, but is more likely to be a cost and a risk that
should be avoided.  Arrange for a single national partner that has multiple
regional locations.  This lowers transportation costs while centralizing
control.
Dell is famous for providing the “best bang for the buck,” and has become a
trusted partner because it delivers high performance and high quality
systems at extremely competitive prices.  The Dell ARS program extends the
Dell partnership into the asset end-of-life cycle with a program that
delivers a high quality disposal service at a price that can save an
enterprise millions of dollars annually.  The Dell ARS program makes it
easy to save money and become a proactive supporter of the environment — a
very simple and compelling value proposition that is worth acting on.



