Volumes Numbers
May, 1987
Peter Kastner, Editor
This document is Stratus Confidential and Proprietary for Internal Use Only. Stratus management
believe in fair and open competition; accordingly, Stratus personnel should rely on the quality and
merits of Stratus products and services and refrain from making misleading statements about
competitor's products.
TANDEM COMPETITIVE UPDATE
Tandem has added new low end and high end products, cut prices, and
cut performance to go with a new SQL database product. While the
basics haven't changed, I recommend you study the attached two papers.
My thanks to Raphael Frommer and the regional Tandem Experts for their
assistance in preparing these papers. Raphael, your regional Tandem
Expert and I would be interested in any further details or competitive
situations involving the products discussed in this letter.
As usual, the competitive work is never done. We'll prepare a
competitive update on the CLX low end price/performance as we receive
more information.
For archival storage, competitive updates will be stored in
%mktg#m9>SESC>doc>competitive_updates.
In spite of Tandem's numerous announcements, Stratus maintains a strong
competitive position, and I look forward to hearing about your selling
successes.
Regards,
Peter Kastner
Manager, Sales Support Programs
Marlboro x2192
o
"Business has only two basic functions—marketing and innovation."


STRATUS CONFIDENTIAL STRATUS CONFIDENTIAL STRATUS CONFIDENTIAL
Tandem Competitive Update
Network Extenders CLX and LXN
New VLX Models
Price Cuts for EXT/TXP Line
May 29, 1987
Raphael Frommer
Introduction
On April 20, 1987 Tandem announced the CLX and LXN, two
new low end hardware products positioned as "network
extenders". These machines are designed, in Tandem's words,
for installation in bank branches, retail chain stores,
warehouses, gas stations and the like. Quantity discounts
(25+) have been established for both in the hope that customers
will purchase large numbers to construct hierarchical Tandem
networks, with VLX and TXP machines at the top. The CLX and
LXN, together with EXT-10 and Tandem terminals/PCs, will be
sold through Tandem's direct sales force, with assistance from
"distributed system product reps", who've been in the field
since July of 1986.
On May 4, 1987, Tandem announced new smaller VLX
configurations (2 and 3-cpu models), and lower prices for its
TXP and EXT 10/25 lines. These price cuts are at least in part
inspired by the as yet unshippable CLX. The smaller VLX models
make top-of-the-line technology attainable by a wider audience.
Previously, the minimum VLX model (4-cpus) was just over $1
million. Now it is "just" $585K (without software).
Significantly, reduced prices have been offset by quietly
restated ET-1 performance figures accompanying March's NonStop
SQL announcement. The new, NonStop SQL-based transaction
protected ratings are 2, 4.5 and 6.5 tps/cpu for NS-II/EXT10,
TXP/EXT25, and VLX, respectively, with 90%-ile response time
relaxed to 2 seconds (the specification calls for subsecond
response time). Why the new response time criterion? In Fault
Tolerant Systems Newsletter No. 55 (March 16, 1987), Omri
Serlin reports: "The official reason given is that this permits
a comparison across the entire product line, including low end
systems, which cannot meet the more stringent response time
constraint."
LXN
Tandem is now a two operating system company. GUARDIAN
remains the mainstay, but the new M68020-based LXN, an Altos
3068-based product available only through Tandem, runs Unix
System V Release 2. Not fault tolerant, it has only limited
"high availability" features, an optional 5-minute
Uninterruptible Power System ($1995) and disk file duplexing
(disk controllers are not duplexed). The LXN is available
immediately in unit quantities for $23,700 (with 2MB, an 80MB
’age
1
Stratus Confidential
May 19, 1987


disk, a 5-1/4" floppy, and 10-port communications controller),
and in quantity 25 for $18,012 under the Networking Discount
Plan. It is expandable to 16MB of memory and 510 MB of disk,
servicing a maximum of 32 users. Promised in the future is an
Ethernet controller, with support for TCP/IP protocol.
Tandem characterizes the LXN as a 2.3 MIP machine
(exceeded only by the top-of-the-line VLX cpu), yet has not
published a transaction per second rating. Is Tandem
intentionally protecting the rest of its home-grown product
line by not disclosing what very well may be its best
transaction price/performance?
Prospects will have legitimate concerns on how
applications on the LXN integrate into existing Tandem
networks. Although LXN-attached terminals can access
applications running on a GUARDIAN machine, and file transfers
are possible via SNAX, differences in the operating systems
force the application programmer to use low-level SNA or
X.25-based process to process techniques.
A desire to better penetrate the US government might have
been an impetus in Tandem's unprecedented reselling of another
company's product, but inspires a question: Can the 32-user LXN
respond to high-end government UNIX application needs? And
what of Tandem's traditional claim to fame, fault tolerance?
Fault tolerance is second rate in the GUARDIAN line as compared
to us and hardly visible in the LXN.
Time will tell how well Tandem can market this
"customized" UNIX product against other less costly UNIX
offerings. Its future success probably depends upon Tandem's
ability to better integrate it into GUARDIAN networks. Rumors
about a new software integration product have been flying, but
no public announcements have been made.
CLX
This product is the more interesting of the two because it
does run GUARDIAN and all current Tandem applications, and
incorporates a few features previously exclusive to Stratus.
To run Tandem's proprietary machine code, the CLX incorporates
a new custom CMOS processor with internal comparators for
improved error detection. Elsewhere, Motorola 68000 and 68010
are used, occasionally in paired configurations with
comparators. Stratus prospects need to understand that
Tandem's trend toward proven comparator-based self-checking
design is not a departure from their software approach to
hardware fault tolerance. Checkpointing is still critical;
there's no hint of duplexed, lockstepped components.
Like the aging EXT10/25 product line, the CLX is a "limited
expansion" product, not configurable to the traditional 16 cpu
limit. Its 20MB/sec Dynabus is not advertised as being
compatible with any other Tandem machine, even though the VLX
Dynabus runs at the same speed. Consequently, co-existence
’age
2
Stratus Confidential
May 19, 1987


with other Tandem equipment will depend upon an EXPAND network
connection. In 4Q87 the two cpu model 620 will be available,
and will provide 5 NonStop SQL ET-1 tps at a unit quantity cost
of $85,000 (less software). The network (qty 25-39) unit price
will be $59,500. In 1Q88 the 4-cpu model 640 will provide 10
tps at a unit quantity cost of $161,000; network unit price is
$112,700. In 2Q88 the CLX line will be rounded out by two
final models. The 660, with six cpus, will run 15 tps for
$240,000; network unit price is $168,000. A uniprocessor,
non-fault tolerant 2.5 tps model 610 will provide the lowest
entry price into the GUARDIAN line at $57,000; network unit
price is $39,900.
Tandem claims that expert system-based diagnostics,
coupled with much improved packaging in a four square foot
cabinet (610 or 620 take one cabinet, 19"W * 30"D * 55"H, the
640 and 660 require additional cabinets) contribute to 98%
user-serviceability. Consequently, they are offering . a
cooperative maintenance plan for the first time, complete with
phone-home to the Tandem National Support Center. Monthly
charges for the 610 and 620 are $190 and $260, respectively.
Assuming a per-cpu cost of $8,000 for GUARDIAN XL
(GUARDIAN 90, ENCOMPASS, NonStop SQL, TRANSFER, PS MAIL,
EXPAND), the following price/performance table can be
constructed:
o
Model
TPS
P/P ($/tps)
610
2.5
$26, 000
620
5.0
$20,200
640
10.0
$19,300
660
15.0
$19,200
Comparison to
Stratus systems is complicated
by a combination
of factors. First, our ET-1 measurements to date have been
based on our file system, not ORACLE, our SQL environment.
Second, Tandem finds it necessary to turn on transaction
protection to achieve s/w-based fault tolerance (FT is
transparently achieved in Stratus h/w and protection is not
explicitly called for in the ET-1 specification). Moreover,
performance changes with cpu failure on the Tandem
configurations (and totally stops with the 610!), so the above
figures are for "all cylinders firing". Lastly, we're not sure
exactly how much disk accompanies these yet-to-be-delivered
configurations, further hampering an apples-to-apples
comparison. Research continues; a future Competitive Update
will compare P/P of existing Stratus products to the CLX.
’age
3
Stratus Confidential
May 19, 1987


New VLX Models
No longer does a customer need to pay $995,275 (H/W) +
$44,000 (S/W) for a workable, 4-cpu VLX minimum system. Now
one can buy the models 312 or 313, each with 8MB/cpu and 1.6GB
of disk (an XL4).
Model
H/W ONLY
Base Price
GUARDIAN 90XF
Total
SQL
ET-l/sec
P/P
312
$585,000
$22,000
$607K
13
$46.7K
313
$759,000
$33,000
$792K
19.5
$40.6K
In addition, Tandem has announced four packaged systems
for users requiring upwards of 50 SQL ET-l/second, and has
furnished exact prices for just the smallest and largest.
Perhaps Tandem perceives some psychological benefit in formally
announcing multimillion dollar configurations that threaten the
very foundations of mainframe-dom. It just could backfire in
certain account situations, when mainframe competitors become
increasingly annoyed by the blatant Tandem threat. It is
unlikely that typical Stratus customers will consider the four
new models on the Tandem pricelist:
Price Cuts for TXP/EXT Products
Model
# of
CPUs
ET-1
rating
Package Price
801
8
50
$2,141,000
802
16
100
estimated by us to be $4,000,000
803
24
150
estimated by us to be $6,000,000
804
32
200
$8,564,000
Most signficant for the typical Stratus prospect are these
cuts, as they affect bread-and-butter, shippable products
providing the best price/performance of the (deliverable)
Tandem line. Keep in mind that the cuts are accompanied by
more conservative SQL-based ET-1 ratings, having the effect of
leaving the old P/P ratios largely unchanged. Note that the
prices below do not include any software.
Model
Description
Old
Price/ET-1
New
Price/ET-1
202
2-TXP Pkg,16MB,V4,125ips
$399K/11
$299K/9
203
3-TXP Pkg,24MB,V4,200ips
$531K/16.5
$446K/13.5
204
4-TXP Pkg,32MB,XL4,200ips
$697K/22
$593K/18
294
EXT10 Base System, QTY 1
$82.5K/4.3
$74.9K/4
294N EXT10 Base System, QTY 25-39
unavailable
$59.2K/4
296
EXT25 Base System, QTY 1
$325K/11
$250K/9
296N EXT25 Base System, QTY 25-39
unavailable
$167K/9
4
Stratus Confidential
May 19, 1987


o
Summary
Tandem's hardware announcements have received considerable
publicity, but ought not impact your chances of winning in a
major way. The price/performance advantage you've
traditionally been able to provide is still there.
In the future, NonStop SQL will provide high level DBMS
functionality for brand new Tandem applications, but will do so
at increased cost compared to VOS/TPF/FMS. Be prepared for
Tandem's ploy of forcing a price/performance comparison to
ORACLE instead. Tandem will undoubtedly dismiss any VOS file
system price/performance edge as being lost when the programmer
productivity cost savings of NonStop SQL are weighed. The
value of NonStop SQL's features can not be dismissed, but
suggest that, as your customer must wait anyway, s/he might as
well wait for an implementation as affordable as our native
file system is today. The vendor likely to provide full
function RDBMS at a reasonable price will be us, not Tandem.
Improvements in packaging and service are coming in the
CLX, just one segment of Tandem's product line, but Stratus
delivers the industry's best service on all its products today.
Tandem's relaxation of the ET-1 response time requirement can
be interpreted as a vote of no confidence in its low end
machines for general purpose transaction processing. Indeed,
Tandem has called the CLX (and LXN) a "network extender",
relegating to it a subset of the functions undertaken by the
more powerful TXP and VLX systems. This approach has merit, no
doubt, but tends to niche the CLX. It is a viable competitor to
the more expandable FT250, but little else.
The success of Tandem's LXN and its impact on Stratus is
hard to predict. Though it features a more fully compliant
UNIX operating system than USF, its power, even in the largest
configurations, is clearly limited. The extent of its
integration into GUARDIAN systems is likewise limited. And
perhaps its hidden transaction processing power is
embarrassingly high (as compared to GUARDIAN products), forcing
Tandem to niche it purely to a networking role.
’age
5
Stratus Confidential
May 19, 1987


STRATUS CONFIDENTIAL STRATUS CONFIDENTIAL STRATUS CONFIDENTIAL
Introduction
Competitive Update: NonStop SQL
April 20, 1987
Raphael Frommer
Last month Tandem announced its strategic new RDBMS
product, NonStop SQL, and simultaneously provided benchmark
results. Their main message is that this strategic product
provides users with all the functional benefits of the
relational approach as well as high performance in a
distributed fault tolerant environment. They have admitted
that ENCOMPASS with ENSCRIBE [file access method] is by today's
standards "only minimally relational." We at Stratus have been
pointing out that weakness for some time, offering as an
alternative ORACLE, a portable, functionally complete RDBMS.
But now Tandem has overcome our functional lead by jumping on
the "SQL is standard" bandwagon, and in a very serious way.
Omri Serlin's FT Systems Newsletter (3/16/87, issue number
55) describes the product and the big benchmark accompanying
its announcement in great detail. You are encouraged to obtain
a copy and read it. For the moment, this update will highlight
some of the key points, especially as they may affect our sales
campaigns. Your local region's or subsidiary's Tandem Expert,
Peter Kastner and I are ready to tackle any questions this
article does not answer. We Tandem watchers and the highest
levels of Stratus management are anxious to learn at which of
your accounts NonStop SQL has surfaced. Do keep us informed.
Key Business Points
[] It's still in beta. Standard support will begin with
GUARDIAN release COO in 4Q87; full support requires CIO, in
1Q88.
[] No currently available packages use it, so its threat
is somewhat reduced. It does present competition to NEW
applications TODAY, despite the fact that it is only in beta.
We have some indications that it is being actively marketed.
[] Performance claims for NonStop SQL are impressive in
that:
a. 
The benchmark was huge and well documented. Serlin
calls it the "largest multiprocessor system ever tested under
an OLTP load."
b. 
The Tandem-furnished numbers indicate there is no
penalty over ENSCRIBE. Indeed some of the curves show it to be
higher performing than ENSCRIBE.
c. 
The absolute value of the numbers is high: 208 fully
protected ET-l/second on $8.8 million in equipment. [The


original specs for ET-1 were stretched a little to give this
result: 90%-ile response time was relaxed to 2 seconds. The
specification calls for 1 second or under. We've always
adhered to that.]
d. 
The benchmark was audited by a consulting firm, Codd
and Date. Recall that E. F. Codd is the gentlemen, who, as an
IBM Fellow, invented the relational db model. His buddy Date
(also formerly with IBM) has written the definitive textbook on
the subject.
e. 
The benchmark appears to restate ENSCRIBE performance
numbers, which were better when the VLX was first announced (40
ET-l/second on a 4 cpu VLX system). Observe that (a) Tandem
wishes to demonstrate that there is no advantage to using
ENSCRIBE instead of NonStop SQL, Tandem's strategy for all
future application development, and (b) Stratus
price/performance looks ON THE SURFACE to be better than ever
compared to Tandem. But take care not to overemphasize the
lower cost of a VOS/TPF/FMS solution! First, Tandem will
correctly point out (admittedly less tangible) cost benefits
related to improved programmer productivity. Secondly, arguing
against the functionality/productivity of an RDBMS is not a
forward-thinking tack to take, and is especially unseemly for a
company that's all along been in step with technology. Think
also how awkward we'd feel announcing improved RDBMS
price/performance some time in the future, reversing our
position by touting the reasons to use it as an alternative to
the old VOS/TPF/FMS way! Thirdly, if the customer believes
that we offer just one application benefit, reduced cost/tps,
Tandem can remove the final objection to a Tandem sale by
resorting to a "one time only" price cut.
Key Technical Points
[] The functionality of NonStop SQL includes:
active (distributed) data dictionary
data access distributable over multiple cpus/systems
ANSI Level 1 compliant data definition language
ANSI Level 2 compliant data manipulation language
interactive SQL interface
programmatic SQL interface for COBOL85
performance-oriented support in DiskProcess 2 (DP2)
[] ENSCRIBE and NonStop SQL accesses can be protected
with one BEGIN-END TRANSACTION envelope (not possible with VOS
and ORACLE databases) but in all other regards suffer from a
similar kind of data file format incompatibility. Though
migration paths have been promised, they're not here yet.
[] Recall that PATHMAKER (which they've been marketing
as a 4th generation language) supports the generation of SCOBOL
requesters and ENSCRIBE-based PATHWAY server skeletons. A
product will eventually be announced to do likewise for NonStop
SQL. We expect it will be superior to PATHMAKER in that the


aacuARDT?Shine • f°r the recJuester code
a GUARDIAN engine, but also an IBM PC,
their new Altos UNIX machine, LXN.
generated may not only be
Tandem PC-compatible, or
How, then, to deal with NonStop SQL?
We give Tandem credit for producing a product with much
appeal, but ought to put it in some perspective for our
customers:
1. 
NonStop SQL is not available yet. Customers who want
to start today have no choice but to beg a beta version from
Tandem or buy a proven product, ORACLE, from Stratus.
2. 
Though it has high functionality, there are many
straightforward applications not requiring such features.
Tandem won't always be successful in forcing higher cost
(compared to us) upon such customers, merely for the sake of
better programmer productivity. In those cases, our superior
price performance will be a very enticing motive to buy
Stratus.
3. 
Some customers buy an RDBMS to achieve not only
programmer productivity, but also program/programmer
portability. Be sure the customer understands that a NonStop
SQL application is NOT portable to another machine; only the
programmer's SQL expertise is portable. Though its performance
is not comparable today, ORACLE can provide both sorts of
portability.
4. 
NonStop SQL applications are transparently fault
tolerant by virtue of their use of the PATHWAY/TMF environment.
Nonetheless, they suffer from the traditional ills of the
software-based solution. These include negative performance
impact at failure time, operator intervention at failure time,
and manual load rebalancing at repair time. Customers who
place high priority on operator-less continuous processing will
continue to prefer us.
We need your help
If you are in competition with Tandem now and feel that
NonStop SQL is/will be an issue, notify your local . Tandem
Expert*, Peter Kastner, AND myself immediately. Do likewise if
you have any general input on the subject, as the Operating
Committee is most interested to learn the situation in the
field.
* For the benefit of newcomers to Stratus, here is a list of
Tandem Experts:
Field:
Jef Allegaert
Mike Byrne
Randy Cummings
Andy DeMartini


Herman Doorn
Lucien Feiereisen
Raphael Frommer
Alan Greenberg
Dick Luebke
Toshiaki Mashima
Phil Mills
Rich Sparacino
Victor To
Headquarters
Barry Gross
Clark Hodder
Peter Kastner
