(^Digital Equipment Loses
/Hioffier of Its Top Officials
By GLENN RIFKIN
• In the midst of a painful struggle to
'return to profitability, the Digital
.Equipment Corporation lost yet an­
other executive when the chief finan-
cial officer, William M. Steul, re­
signed yesterday.
The company announced that its
controller, Vincent J. Mullarkey, 46,
who has been at Digital for 23 years,
would become a vice president and
the chief financial officer.
Mr. Steul was named chief finan-
'cial officer by the founder of Digital,
Kenneth H. Olsen, in June 1992, weeks
before the board asked Mr. Olsen to
resign as president. Mr. Steul’s rise
had been controversial because he
had not worked In the finance opera­
tion for more than a decade.
When Robert B. Palmer succeeded
Mr. Olsen, he retained Mr. Steul. But
several executives have left the com­
pany, including Edward Lucerne, vice
president of worldwide sales and
marketing; Edward McDonough,
vice president of manufacturing, and
Winston Hindle, vice president of
quality, ethics and business prac­
tices. A spokeswoman for Digital said
the departures of Mr. McDonough
and Mr. Hindle were planned retire­
ments.
Last month the company reported
a $183 million loss for its third fiscal
quarter, and Mr. Palmer conceded
that he had been caught by surprise
by the severity of the loss. Analysts
speculated that Mr. Steul might have
been a victim of that debacle as Mr.
Palmer sought stronger flnanlcal
leadership for the company.
Franc Romano, a former Digital
finance manager and market re­
search director and now a consultant
with the Aberdeen Group in Boston,
said Mr. Steul had stepped into a job
"that nobody in the company wanted
and. to some extent, has taken the rap
for the company's poor perform­
ance.”
Mr. Romano said he was dlsap-
Continucd on Page D6

Digital Equipment Loses^
Another of Its Top Officials
Continued From First Business Page ■
pointed that Mr. Palmer had not used
this opportunity to look outside Digi­
tal and bring In "much needed finan­
cial leadership and talent.'*
"Vln’s only job has been at Digi­
tal,” Mr. Romano added, “and I don't
think he brings the broad business
experience that Palmer says he does
to Digital"
Controller for 18 Months
Mr. Palmer said In a statement
that Digital was making steady
progress back to profitability and
that the appointment of Mr. Mullan-
key, with his background In financial
management and controls, "Is consis­
tent with our determination to con­
centrate on accelerating . that
progress."
Mr. Mullarkey has held financial-
management positions in Digital op­
erations and business units In Eu­
rope, Asia and the United States, and
he has been corporate controller, re­
porting to Mr. Steul, for 18 months.
In an interview, Mr.Mullarkey said
he was surprised by Mr. Sleul's deci­
sion to step down, but would not com­
ment on why that decision was made.
He did say Mr. Steul had recommend­
ed him as his successor.
Mr. Mullarkey said Digital's fi­
nance organization was strong. "I
don’t expect we'll miss a beat," he
said. "I plan to crank up the r.p.m.'s
and move forward aggressively."
He said he was focusing on restor­
ing competitiveness and emphasizing
a return to sustainable profitability.
He said reducing costs and Improving
asset management and cash posi­
tions would be crucial as Digital -. ■
moved to Its next phase of renovation, '
Mr. Palmer told employees last
month that the company would cut an .
additional 20,000 workers beginning •" ■
In the next fiscal year, which starts on
July 1. - "e'
Digital has also said it will Incur *
another significant restructuring
charge, possibly as high as $1 billion,
according to analysts. Mr. Mullarky
said details might be announced at
the end of next month. .
"I'm focusing on optimizing the •
company while It's In transition," Mr. ■ *
Mullarkey said. "This can be very -
complicated, particuarly with the fur-
ther level of downsizing we have to
deal with. We don’t want to lose con- - -
trol during this time.” -v
Weekly Closing of Books
Mr. Mullarkey added that he was -J?'
putting Into place controls to help '
increase thepredlctabllltyof quarter­
ly results, a problem for Digital in
recent quarters. Mr. Mullarkey said •"
Digital was closing Its books weekly —
rather than monthly, to avoid missing
Important changes like aggressive
discounting late In a quarter. “I know
of no other companies’ doing It like
this,” he said.
Mr. Mullarkey also responded to
reports published yesterday about a
memo from the Digital treasurer,
Ilene Jacobs, that warned executives *£”
that the cash level for the company
was In jeopardy. “Cash on hand is
largely on target with our expecta-
tlons," he said. Ms. Jacobs's memo 2
had "a couple of very bold state-
ments" that the reports had taken out --
of context, he said. •

